ment.

     (A)  "W. Fred Brown, AT&T Vice President for
Advanced Technical Development, testified May 8  at a
Washington hearing of the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration (NTIA), regarding
Bellcore's GARDEN project.  GARDEN (Generalized
Automatic Remote Distributed Electronic Network)  is a
telephone-switch programming tool that makes it possible
to develop new telecom services, including hold-on-hold
and customized message transfers,  from any keypad
terminal, within seconds.   The GARDEN prototype
combines centrex lines with a minicomputer using UNIX
operating system software."

     (B)  "Crimson Flash 512 of the Centrex Mobsters
reports:  D00dz, you wouldn't believe this GARDEN
bullshit Bellcore's just come up with!   Now you don't even
need a lousy Commodore to reprogram a switch -- just log
on to GARDEN as a technician, and you can reprogram
switches right off the keypad in any public phone booth!
You can give yourself hold-on-hold and customized
message transfers, and best of all, the thing is run off
(notoriously insecure)  centrex lines using -- get this --
standard UNIX software!  Ha ha ha ha!"

     Message (A), couched in typical techno-
bureaucratese, appears tedious and almost unreadable.
(A) scarcely seems threatening or menacing.   Message
(B), on the other hand, is a dreadful thing, prima facie
evidence of a dire conspiracy, definitely not the kind of
thing you want your teenager reading.

     The *information,* however, is identical.  It is
*public*
information, presented before the federal government in
an open hearing.  It is not "secret."  It is not
"proprietary."
It is not even "confidential."  On the contrary, the
development of advanced software systems is a matter of
great public pride to Bellcore.

     However, when Bellcore publicly announces a project
of this kind, it expects a certain attitude from the public
--
something along the lines of  *gosh wow, you guys are
great, keep that up, whatever it is*  --  certainly not
cruel
mimickry, one-upmanship and outrageous speculations
about possible security holes.

     Now put yourself in the place of a policeman
confronted by an outraged parent, or telco official, with a
copy of Version (B).  This well-meaning citizen, to his
horror, has discovered a local bulletin-board carrying
outrageous stuff like (B), which his son is examining with a
deep and unhealthy interest.   If (B) were printed in a book
or magazine, you, as an American law enforcement officer,
would know that it would take a hell of a lot of trouble to
do
anything about it;  but it doesn't take technical genius to
recognize that if there's a computer in your area harboring
stuff like (B), there's going to be trouble.

     In fact, if you ask around, any computer-literate cop
will tell you straight out that boards with stuff like (B)
are
the *source* of trouble.  And the *worst* source of trouble
on boards are the ringleaders inventing and spreading
stuff like (B).  If it weren't for these jokers, there
wouldn't
*be* any trouble.

     And Legion of Doom were on boards like nobody
else.  Plovernet.  The Legion of Doom Board.  The Farmers
of Doom Board.  Metal Shop.  OSUNY.  Blottoland.
Private Sector.  Atlantis.  Digital Logic.  Hell Phrozen
Over.

     LoD members also ran their own boards.  "Silver Spy"
started his own board, "Catch-22,"  considered one of the
heaviest around.   So did "Mentor," with his "Phoenix
Project."   When they didn't run boards themselves, they
showed up on other people's boards, to brag, boast, and
strut.  And where they themselves didn't go, their philes
went, carrying evil knowledge and an even more evil
attitude.

     As early as 1986, the police were under the vague
impression that *everyone* in the underground was
Legion of Doom.   LoD was never that large --
considerably smaller than either "Metal
Communications" or "The Administration," for instance --
but LoD got tremendous press.  Especially in *Phrack,*
which at times read like an LoD fan magazine; and
*Phrack* was everywhere, especially in the offices of telco
security.   You couldn't *get* busted as a phone phreak, a
hacker, or even a lousy codes kid or warez dood, without
the cops asking if you were LoD.

     This was a difficult charge to deny, as LoD never
distributed membership badges or laminated ID cards.  If
they had, they would likely have died out quickly, for
turnover in their membership was considerable.  LoD was
less a high-tech street-gang than an ongoing state-of-
mind.  LoD was the Gang That Refused to Die.   By 1990,
LoD had *ruled* for ten years, and it seemed *weird* to
police that they were continually busting people who were
only sixteen years old.   All these teenage small-timers
were pleading the tiresome hacker litany  of "just curious,
no criminal intent."  Somewhere at the center of this
conspiracy there had to be some serious adult
masterminds, not this seemingly endless supply of myopic
suburban white kids with high SATs and funny haircuts.

     There was no question that most any American
hacker arrested would "know" LoD.  They knew the
handles of contributors to *LoD Tech Journal,*  and were
likely to have learned their craft through LoD boards and
LoD activism.  But they'd never met anyone from LoD.
Even some of the rotating cadre who were actually and
formally "in LoD" knew one another only by board-mail
and pseudonyms.   This was a highly unconventional
profile for a criminal conspiracy.  Computer networking,
and the rapid evolution of the digital underground,  made
the situation very diffuse and confusing.

     Furthermore, a big reputation in the digital
underground did not coincide with one's willingness to
commit "crimes."   Instead, reputation was based on
cleverness and technical mastery.  As a result, it often
seemed that the *heavier* the hackers were, the *less*
likely they were to have committed any kind of common,
easily prosecutable crime.   There were some hackers who
could really steal.  And there were hackers who could
really hack.  But the two groups didn't seem to overlap
much, if at all.   For instance, most people in the
underground looked up to "Emmanuel Goldstein" of
*2600* as a hacker demigod.  But Goldstein's publishing
activities were entirely legal -- Goldstein just printed
dodgy stuff and talked about politics, he didn't even hack.
When you came right down to it, Goldstein spent half his
time complaining that computer security *wasn't strong
enough* and ought to be drastically improved across the
board!

     Truly heavy-duty hackers, those with serious
technical skills who had earned the respect of the
underground,  never stole money or abused credit cards.
Sometimes they might abuse phone-codes -- but often,
they seemed to get all the free phone-time they wanted
without leaving a trace of any kind.

     The best hackers, the most powerful and technically
accomplished, were not professional fraudsters.   They
raided computers habitually, but wouldn't alter anything,
or damage anything.  They didn't even steal computer
equipment -- most had day-jobs messing with hardware,
and could get all the cheap secondhand equipment they
wanted.   The hottest hackers, unlike the teenage
wannabes,  weren't snobs about fancy or expensive
hardware.  Their machines tended to be raw second-hand
digital hot-rods full of custom add-ons that they'd cobbled
together out of chickenwire, memory chips and spit.  Some
were adults, computer software writers and consultants by
trade, and making quite good livings at it.  Some of them
*actually worked for the phone company* --  and for those,
the "hackers" actually found under the skirts of Ma Bell,
there would be little mercy in 1990.

      It has long been an article of faith in the
underground that the "best" hackers never get caught.
They're far too smart, supposedly.  They never get caught
because they never boast, brag, or strut.   These demigods
may read underground boards (with a condescending
smile), but they never say anything there.   The "best"
hackers, according to legend, are adult computer
professionals, such as mainframe system administrators,
who already know the ins and outs of their particular
brand of security.   Even the "best" hacker can't break in
to
just any computer at random: the knowledge of security
holes is too specialized, varying widely with different
software and hardware.  But if people are employed to run,
say, a UNIX mainframe or a VAX/VMS machine, then
they tend to learn security from the inside out.  Armed
with this knowledge, they can look into most anybody
else's UNIX or VMS without much trouble or risk, if they
want to.   And, according to hacker legend, of course they
want to, so of course they do.   They just don't make a big
deal of what they've done.  So nobody ever finds out.

     It is also an article of faith in the underground that
professional telco people "phreak" like crazed weasels.
*Of course* they spy on Madonna's phone calls -- I mean,
*wouldn't you?*  Of course they give themselves free long-
distance -- why the hell should *they* pay, they're running
the whole shebang!

     It has, as a third matter, long been an article of
faith
that any hacker caught can escape serious punishment if
he confesses *how he did it.*  Hackers seem to believe
that governmental agencies and large corporations are
blundering about in cyberspace like eyeless jellyfish or
cave salamanders.  They feel that these large but
pathetically stupid organizations will proffer up genuine
gratitude, and perhaps even a security post and a big
salary, to the hot-shot intruder who will deign to reveal to
them the supreme genius of his modus operandi.

     In the case of longtime LoD member "Control-C,"
this actually happened, more or less.   Control-C had led
Michigan Bell a merry chase, and when captured in 1987,
he turned out to be a bright and apparently physically
harmless young fanatic, fascinated by phones.   There was
no chance in hell that Control-C would actually repay the
enormous and largely theoretical sums in long-distance
service that he had accumulated from Michigan Bell.   He
could always be indicted for fraud or computer-intrusion,
but there seemed little real point in this -- he hadn't
physically damaged any computer.  He'd just plead guilty,
and he'd likely get the usual slap-on-the-wrist, and in the
meantime it would be a big hassle for Michigan Bell just
to bring up the case.  But if kept on the payroll, he might
at
least keep his fellow hackers at bay.

     There were uses for him.  For instance, a contrite
Control-C was featured on Michigan Bell internal posters,
sternly warning employees to shred their trash.   He'd
always gotten most of his best inside info from "trashing" -
-
raiding telco dumpsters, for useful data indiscreetly
thrown away.   He signed these posters, too.  Control-C had
become something like a Michigan Bell mascot.  And in
fact, Control-C *did* keep other hackers at bay.  Little
hackers were quite scared of Control-C and his heavy-duty
Legion of Doom friends.   And big hackers *were* his
friends and didn't want to screw up his cushy situation.

     No matter what one might say of LoD, they did stick
together.   When "Wasp," an apparently genuinely
malicious New York hacker, began crashing Bellcore
machines,  Control-C received swift volunteer help from
"the Mentor" and the Georgia LoD wing  made up of "The
Prophet," "Urvile," and "Leftist."   Using Mentor's Phoenix
Project board to coordinate, the Doomsters helped telco
security to trap Wasp, by luring him into a machine with a
tap and line-trace installed.  Wasp lost.  LoD won!  And
my, did they brag.

       Urvile, Prophet and Leftist were well-qualified for
this activity, probably more so even than the quite
accomplished Control-C.  The Georgia boys knew all about
phone switching-stations.  Though relative johnny-come-
latelies in the Legion of Doom, they were considered some
of LoD's heaviest guys, into the hairiest systems around.
They had the good fortune to live in or near Atlanta, home
of the sleepy and apparently tolerant BellSouth RBOC.

     As RBOC security went, BellSouth were "cake."   US
West (of Arizona, the Rockies and the Pacific Northwest)
were tough and aggressive, probably the heaviest RBOC
around.  Pacific Bell, California's PacBell, were sleek,
high-
tech, and longtime veterans of the LA phone-phreak wars.
NYNEX had the misfortune to run the New York City area,
and were warily prepared for most anything.   Even
Michigan Bell, a division of the Ameritech RBOC, at least
had the elementary sense to hire their own hacker as a
useful scarecrow.  But BellSouth, even though their
corporate P.R.  proclaimed them to have "Everything You
Expect From a Leader," were pathetic.

     When rumor about LoD's mastery of Georgia's
switching network got around to BellSouth through
Bellcore and telco security scuttlebutt, they at first
refused
to believe it.   If you paid serious attention to every
rumor
out and about these hacker kids, you would hear all kinds
of wacko saucer-nut nonsense:  that the National Security
Agency monitored all American phone calls, that the CIA
and DEA tracked traffic on bulletin-boards with word-
analysis programs, that the Condor could start World
War III from a payphone.

     If there were hackers into BellSouth switching-
stations, then how come nothing had happened?  Nothing
had been hurt.  BellSouth's machines weren't crashing.
BellSouth wasn't suffering especially badly from fraud.
BellSouth's customers weren't complaining.  BellSouth
was headquartered in Atlanta, ambitious metropolis of the
new high-tech Sunbelt; and BellSouth was upgrading its
network by leaps and bounds, digitizing the works left right
and center.   They could hardly be considered sluggish or
naive.  BellSouth's technical expertise was second to none,
thank you kindly.

     But then came the Florida business.

     On June 13, 1989, callers to the Palm Beach County
Probation Department, in Delray Beach, Florida,  found
themselves involved in a remarkable discussion with a
phone-sex worker named "Tina" in New York State.
Somehow, *any* call to this probation office near Miami
was instantly and magically transported across state lines,
at no extra charge to the user, to a pornographic phone-
sex hotline hundreds of miles away!

     This practical joke may seem utterly hilarious at first
hearing, and indeed there was a good deal of chuckling
about it in phone phreak circles, including the Autumn
1989 issue of *2600.*  But for Southern Bell  (the division
of
the BellSouth RBOC supplying local service for Florida,
Georgia, North Carolina and South Carolina),  this was a
smoking gun.  For the first time ever,  a computer intruder
had broken into a BellSouth central office switching
station and re-programmed it!

     Or so BellSouth thought in June 1989.  Actually, LoD
members had been frolicking harmlessly in BellSouth
switches since September 1987.  The stunt of June 13 --
call-forwarding a number through manipulation of a
switching station -- was child's play for hackers as
accomplished as the Georgia wing of LoD.  Switching calls
interstate sounded like a big deal, but it took only four
lines of code to accomplish this.    An easy, yet more
discreet, stunt, would be to call-forward another number to
your own house.  If you were careful and considerate, and
changed the software back later, then not a soul would
know.  Except you.  And whoever you had bragged to about
it.

     As for BellSouth, what they didn't know wouldn't hurt
them.

     Except now somebody had blown the whole thing
wide open, and BellSouth knew.

     A now alerted and considerably paranoid BellSouth
began searching switches right and left for signs of
impropriety, in that hot summer of 1989.  No fewer than
forty-two BellSouth employees were put on 12-hour shifts,
twenty-four hours a day, for two solid months, poring over
records and monitoring computers for any sign of phony
access.  These forty-two overworked experts were known as
BellSouth's  "Intrusion Task Force."

       What the investigators found astounded them.
Proprietary telco databases had been manipulated:
phone numbers had been created out of thin air, with no
users' names and no addresses.  And perhaps worst of all,
no charges and no records of use.   The new digital
ReMOB  (Remote Observation)  diagnostic feature had
been extensively tampered with -- hackers had learned to
reprogram ReMOB software, so that they could listen in
on any switch-routed call at their leisure!   They were
using
telco property to *spy!*

      The electrifying news went out throughout law
enforcement in 1989.  It had never really occurred to
anyone at BellSouth that their prized and brand-new
digital switching-stations could be *re-programmed.*
People seemed utterly amazed that anyone could have
the nerve.   Of course these switching stations were
"computers," and everybody knew hackers liked to "break
into computers:"   but telephone people's computers were
*different* from normal people's computers.

      The exact reason *why* these computers were
"different" was rather ill-defined.  It certainly wasn't the
extent of their security.  The security on these BellSouth
computers was lousy;  the AIMSX computers, for instance,
didn't even have passwords.   But there was no question
that BellSouth strongly *felt* that their computers were
very different indeed.  And if there were some criminals
out there who had not gotten that message, BellSouth was
determined to see that message taught.

     After all, a 5ESS switching station was no mere
bookkeeping system for some local chain of florists.
Public service depended on these stations.   Public
*safety* depended on these stations.

     And hackers, lurking in there call-forwarding or
ReMobbing,  could spy on anybody in the local area!
They could spy on telco officials!  They could spy on police
stations!  They could spy on local offices of the Secret
Service....

     In 1989, electronic cops and hacker-trackers began
using scrambler-phones and secured lines.  It only made
sense.  There was no telling who was into those systems.
Whoever they were, they sounded scary.   This was some
new level of antisocial daring.  Could be West German
hackers, in the pay of the KGB.   That too had seemed a
weird and farfetched notion, until Clifford Stoll had poked
and prodded a sluggish Washington law-enforcement
bureaucracy into investigating a computer intrusion that
turned out to be exactly that -- *hackers, in the pay of the
KGB!*    Stoll, the  systems manager for an Internet lab in
Berkeley California, had ended up on the front page of the
*New York  Times,*  proclaimed a national  hero in the
first true story of international computer espionage.
Stoll's counterspy efforts, which he related in a
bestselling
book, *The Cuckoo's Egg,*  in 1989, had established the
credibility of 'hacking' as a possible threat to national
security.  The United States Secret Service doesn't mess
around when it suspects a possible action by a foreign
intelligence apparat.

     The Secret Service scrambler-phones and secured
lines put a tremendous kink in law enforcement's ability to
operate freely; to get the word out, cooperate, prevent
misunderstandings.   Nevertheless, 1989 scarcely seemed
the time for half-measures.  If the police and Secret
Service themselves were not operationally secure, then
how could they reasonably demand measures of security
from private enterprise?  At least, the inconvenience
made people aware of the seriousness  of the threat.

     If there was a final spur needed to get the police off
the dime, it came in the realization that the emergency
911 system was vulnerable.   The 911 system has its own
specialized software, but it is run on the same digital
switching systems as the rest of the telephone network.
911 is not physically different from normal telephony.  But
it is certainly culturally  different, because this is the
area
of telephonic cyberspace reserved for the police and
emergency services.

     Your average policeman may not know much about
hackers or phone-phreaks.  Computer people are weird;
even computer *cops*  are rather weird; the stuff they do is
hard to figure out.   But a threat to the 911 system is
anything but an abstract threat.  If the 911 system goes,
people can die.

     Imagine being in a car-wreck, staggering to a phone-
booth, punching 911 and hearing "Tina" pick up the
phone-sex line somewhere in New York!   The situation's
no longer comical, somehow.

      And was it possible?  No question.  Hackers had
attacked 911 systems before.  Phreaks can max-out 911
systems just by siccing a bunch of computer-modems on
them in tandem, dialling them over and over until they
clog.  That's very crude and low-tech, but it's still a
serious
business.

     The time had come for action.  It was time to take
stern measures with the underground.  It was time to start
picking up the dropped threads, the loose edges, the bits
of braggadocio here and there; it was time to get on the
stick and start putting serious casework together.  Hackers
weren't "invisible."  They *thought*  they were invisible;
but the truth was, they had just been tolerated too long.

     Under sustained police attention in the summer of
'89, the digital underground began to unravel as never
before.

     The first big break in the case came very early on:
July 1989, the following month.  The perpetrator of the
"Tina" switch was caught, and confessed.  His name was
"Fry Guy," a 16-year-old in Indiana.  Fry Guy had been a
very wicked young man.

     Fry Guy had earned his handle from a stunt involving
French fries.  Fry Guy had filched the log-in of a local
MacDonald's manager and had logged-on to the
MacDonald's mainframe on the Sprint Telenet system.
Posing as the manager, Fry Guy had altered MacDonald's
records, and given some teenage hamburger-flipping
friends of his, generous raises.  He had not been caught.

     Emboldened by success, Fry Guy moved on to credit-
card abuse.  Fry Guy was quite an accomplished talker;
with a gift for "social engineering."   If you can do
"social
engineering"  -- fast-talk, fake-outs, impersonation,
conning, scamming -- then card abuse comes easy.
(Getting away with it in the long run is another question).

     Fry Guy had run across "Urvile" of the Legion of
Doom on the ALTOS Chat board in Bonn, Germany.
ALTOS Chat was a sophisticated board, accessible
through globe-spanning computer networks like BITnet,
Tymnet, and Telenet.    ALTOS was much frequented by
members of Germany's  Chaos Computer Club.  Two
Chaos hackers who hung out on ALTOS, "Jaeger" and
"Pengo," had been the central villains of Clifford Stoll's
CUCKOO'S EGG case:  consorting in East Berlin with a
spymaster from the KGB, and breaking into American
computers for hire, through the Internet.

     When LoD members learned the story of Jaeger's
depredations from Stoll's book, they were rather less than
impressed, technically speaking.  On LoD's own favorite
board of the moment, "Black Ice," LoD members bragged
that they themselves could have done all the Chaos break-
ins in a week flat!  Nevertheless,  LoD were grudgingly
impressed by the Chaos rep, the sheer hairy-eyed daring
of hash-smoking anarchist hackers who had rubbed
shoulders with the fearsome big-boys of international
Communist espionage.  LoD members sometimes traded
bits of knowledge with friendly German hackers on ALTOS
-- phone numbers for vulnerable VAX/VMS computers in
Georgia, for instance.  Dutch and British phone phreaks,
and the Australian clique of "Phoenix," "Nom," and
"Electron," were ALTOS regulars, too.  In underground
circles, to hang out on ALTOS was considered the sign of
an elite dude, a sophisticated hacker of the international
digital jet-set.

     Fry Guy quickly learned how to raid information from
credit-card consumer-reporting agencies.  He had over a
hundred stolen credit-card numbers in his notebooks, and
upwards of a thousand swiped long-distance access codes.
He knew how to get onto Altos, and how to talk the talk of
the underground convincingly.  He now wheedled
knowledge of switching-station tricks from Urvile on the
ALTOS system.

     Combining these two forms of knowledge enabled
Fry Guy to bootstrap his way up to a new form of wire-
fraud.  First, he'd snitched credit card numbers from
credit-company computers.  The data he copied included
names, addresses and phone numbers of the random
card-holders.

     Then Fry Guy, impersonating a card-holder, called up
Western Union and asked for a cash advance on "his"
credit card.  Western Union, as a security guarantee,
would call the customer back, at home, to verify the
transaction.

     But, just as he had switched the Florida probation
office to "Tina" in New York,  Fry Guy switched the card-
holder's number to a local pay-phone.  There he would
lurk in wait, muddying his trail by routing and re-routing
the call, through switches as far away as Canada.   When
the call came through, he would boldly "social-engineer,"
or con, the Western Union people, pretending to be the
legitimate card-holder.  Since he'd answered the proper
phone number, the deception was not very hard.
Western Union's money was then shipped to a
confederate of Fry Guy's in his home town in Indiana.

     Fry Guy and his cohort, using LoD techniques, stole
six thousand dollars from Western Union between
December 1988 and July 1989.  They also dabbled in
ordering delivery of stolen goods through card-fraud.  Fry
Guy was intoxicated with success.  The sixteen-year-old
fantasized wildly to hacker rivals, boasting that he'd used
rip-off money to hire  himself a big limousine, and had
driven out-of-state with a groupie from his favorite heavy-
metal band, Motley Crue.

     Armed with knowledge, power, and a gratifying
stream of free money, Fry Guy now took it upon himself to
call local representatives of Indiana Bell security, to
brag,
boast, strut, and utter tormenting warnings that his
powerful friends in the notorious Legion of Doom could
crash the national telephone network.  Fry Guy even
named a date for the scheme:  the Fourth of July, a
national holiday.

     This egregious example of the begging-for-arrest
syndrome was shortly followed by Fry Guy's arrest.  After
the Indiana telephone company figured out who he was,
the Secret Service had DNRs -- Dialed Number
Recorders -- installed on his home phone lines.  These
devices are not taps, and can't record the substance of
phone calls, but they do record the phone numbers of all
calls going in and out.   Tracing these numbers showed Fry
Guy's long-distance code fraud, his extensive ties to pirate
bulletin boards, and numerous personal calls to his LoD
friends in Atlanta.   By July 11, 1989, Prophet, Urvile and
Leftist also had Secret Service DNR "pen registers"
installed on their own lines.

     The Secret Service showed up in force at Fry Guy's
house on July 22, 1989, to the horror of his unsuspecting
parents.  The raiders were led by a special agent from the
Secret Service's Indianapolis office.   However, the raiders
were accompanied and advised by Timothy M. Foley of
the Secret Service's Chicago office (a gentleman about
whom we will soon be hearing a great deal).

     Following federal computer-crime techniques that
had been standard since the early 1980s, the Secret
Service searched the house thoroughly, and seized all of
Fry Guy's electronic equipment and notebooks.   All Fry
Guy's equipment went out the door in the custody of the
Secret Service, which put a swift end to his depredations.

     The USSS interrogated Fry Guy at length.  His case
was put in the charge of Deborah Daniels, the federal US
Attorney for the Southern District of Indiana.  Fry Guy was
charged with eleven counts of computer fraud,
unauthorized computer access, and wire fraud.   The
evidence was thorough and irrefutable.  For his part, Fry
Guy blamed his corruption on the Legion of Doom and
offered to testify against them.

     Fry Guy insisted that the Legion intended to crash
the phone system on a national holiday.   And when AT&T
crashed on Martin Luther King Day, 1990, this lent a
credence to his claim that genuinely alarmed telco
security and the Secret Service.

     Fry Guy eventually pled guilty on May 31, 1990.  On
September 14, he was sentenced to forty-four months'
probation and  four hundred hours' community service.
He could have had it much worse; but it made sense to
prosecutors to take it easy on this teenage minor, while
zeroing in on the notorious kingpins of the Legion of
Doom.

     But the case against LoD had nagging flaws.
Despite the best effort of investigators, it was impossible
to prove that the Legion had crashed the phone system on
January 15, because they, in fact, hadn't done so.  The
investigations of 1989 did show that certain members of
the Legion of Doom had achieved unprecedented power
over the telco switching stations, and that they were in
active conspiracy to obtain more power yet.  Investigators
were privately convinced that the Legion of Doom
intended to do awful things with this knowledge, but mere
evil intent was not enough to put them in jail.

        And although the Atlanta Three -- Prophet, Leftist,
and especially Urvile -- had taught Fry Guy plenty, they
were not themselves credit-card fraudsters.  The only
thing they'd "stolen" was long-distance service -- and since
they'd done much of that through phone-switch
manipulation, there was no easy way to judge how much
they'd "stolen," or whether this practice was even "theft"
of
any easily recognizable kind.

       Fry Guy's theft of long-distance codes had cost the
phone companies plenty.  The theft of long-distance
service may be a fairly theoretical "loss,"  but it costs
genuine money and genuine time to delete all those
stolen codes, and to re-issue new codes to the innocent
owners of those corrupted codes.  The owners of the codes
themselves are victimized, and lose time and money and
peace of mind in the hassle.   And then there were the
credit-card victims to deal with, too, and Western Union.
When it came to rip-off, Fry Guy was far more of a thief
than LoD.  It was only when it came to actual computer
expertise that Fry Guy was small potatoes.

     The Atlanta Legion thought most "rules" of
cyberspace were for rodents and losers, but they *did*
have rules.  *They never crashed anything, and they never
took money.*   These were rough rules-of-thumb, and
rather dubious principles when it comes to the ethical
subtleties of cyberspace, but they enabled the Atlanta
Three to operate with a relatively clear conscience (though
never with peace of mind).

     If you didn't hack for money, if you weren't robbing
people of actual funds -- money in the bank, that is --
then
nobody *really* got hurt, in LoD's opinion.  "Theft of
service" was a bogus issue, and "intellectual property" was
a bad joke.   But LoD had only elitist contempt for rip-off
artists, "leechers," thieves.   They considered themselves
clean.  In their opinion, if you didn't smash-up or crash
any
systems  -- (well, not on purpose, anyhow -- accidents can
happen, just ask Robert Morris)  then it was very unfair to
call you a "vandal" or a "cracker."  When you were
hanging out on-line with your "pals" in telco security, you
could face them down from the higher plane of hacker
morality.  And you could mock the police from the
supercilious heights of your hacker's quest for pure
knowledge.

      But from the point of view of law enforcement and
telco security, however, Fry Guy was not really dangerous.
The Atlanta Three *were* dangerous.  It wasn't the crimes
they were committing, but the *danger,*   the potential
hazard, the sheer *technical power*  LoD had
accumulated, that had made the situation untenable.

     Fry Guy was not LoD.  He'd never laid eyes on
anyone in LoD; his only contacts with them had been
electronic.  Core members of the Legion of Doom tended
to meet physically for conventions every year or so, to get
drunk, give each other the hacker high-sign, send out for
pizza and ravage hotel suites.  Fry Guy had never done any
of this.   Deborah Daniels assessed Fry Guy accurately as
"an LoD wannabe."

     Nevertheless Fry Guy's crimes would be directly
attributed to LoD in much future police propaganda.  LoD
would be described as "a closely knit group" involved in
"numerous illegal activities" including "stealing and
modifying individual credit histories," and "fraudulently
obtaining money and property."  Fry Guy did this, but the
Atlanta Three didn't; they simply weren't into theft, but
rather intrusion.   This caused a strange kink in the
prosecution's strategy.  LoD were accused of
"disseminating information about attacking computers to
other computer hackers in an effort to shift the focus of
law enforcement to those other hackers and away from the
Legion of Doom."

     This last accusation (taken directly from a press
release by the Chicago Computer Fraud and Abuse Task
Force) sounds particularly far-fetched.  One might
conclude at this point that investigators would have been
well-advised to go ahead and "shift their focus" from the
"Legion of Doom."   Maybe they *should* concentrate on
"those other hackers" -- the ones who were actually
stealing money and physical objects.

     But the Hacker Crackdown of 1990 was not a simple
policing action.  It wasn't meant just to walk the beat in
cyberspace -- it was a *crackdown,* a deliberate attempt to
nail the core of the operation, to send a dire and potent
message that would settle the hash of the digital
underground for good.

     By this reasoning, Fry Guy wasn't much more than
the electronic equivalent of a cheap streetcorner dope
dealer.  As long as the masterminds of LoD were still
flagrantly operating, pushing their mountains of illicit
knowledge right and left, and whipping up enthusiasm for
blatant lawbreaking, then there would be an *infinite
supply*  of Fry Guys.

         Because LoD were flagrant, they had left trails
everywhere, to be picked up by law enforcement in New
York, Indiana, Florida, Texas, Arizona, Missouri, even
Australia.  But 1990's war on the Legion of Doom was led
out of Illinois, by the Chicago Computer Fraud and Abuse
Task Force.

                         #


       The Computer Fraud and Abuse Task Force, led by
federal prosecutor William J. Cook, had started in 1987
and had swiftly become one of the most aggressive local
"dedicated computer-crime units."  Chicago was a natural
home for such a group.  The world's first computer
bulletin-board system had been invented in Illinois.  The
state of Illinois had some of the nation's first and
sternest
computer crime laws.   Illinois State Police were markedly
alert to the possibilities of white-collar crime and
electronic fraud.

     And William J. Cook in particular was a rising star in
electronic crime-busting.   He and his fellow federal
prosecutors at the U.S. Attorney's office in Chicago had a
tight relation with the Secret Service, especially go-
getting
Chicago-based agent Timothy  Foley.  While Cook and his
Department of Justice colleagues plotted strategy, Foley
was their man on the street.

     Throughout the 1980s, the federal government had
given prosecutors an armory of new, untried legal tools
against computer crime.  Cook and his colleagues were
pioneers in the use of these new statutes in the real-life
cut-and-thrust of the federal courtroom.

     On October 2, 1986, the US Senate had passed the
"Computer Fraud and Abuse Act" unanimously, but there
were pitifully few convictions under this statute.  Cook's
group took their name from this statute, since they were
determined to transform this powerful but rather
theoretical Act of Congress into a real-life engine of legal
destruction against computer fraudsters and scofflaws.

     It was not a question of merely discovering crimes,
investigating them, and then trying and punishing their
perpetrators.   The Chicago unit, like most everyone else in
the business, already *knew* who the bad guys were:  the
Legion of Doom and the writers and editors of *Phrack.*
The task at hand was to find some legal means of putting
these characters away.

     This approach might seem a bit dubious, to someone
not acquainted with the gritty realities of prosecutorial
work.  But prosecutors don't put people in jail for crimes
they have committed; they put people in jail for crimes
they have committed *that can be proved in court.*
Chicago federal police put Al Capone in prison for
income-tax fraud.   Chicago is a big town, with a rough-
and-ready bare-knuckle tradition on both sides of the law.

     Fry Guy had broken the case wide open and alerted
telco security to the scope of the problem.   But Fry Guy's
crimes would not put the Atlanta Three behind bars --
much less the wacko underground journalists of *Phrack.*
So on July 22, 1989, the same day that Fry Guy was raided
in Indiana, the Secret Service descended upon the Atlanta
Three.

     This was likely inevitable.  By the summer of 1989, law
enforcement were closing in on the Atlanta Three from at
least six directions at once.   First, there were the leads
from Fry Guy, which had led to the DNR registers being
installed on the lines of the Atlanta Three.  The DNR
evidence alone would have finished them off, sooner or
later.

     But second, the Atlanta lads were already well-known
to Control-C and his telco security sponsors.  LoD's
contacts with telco security had made them overconfident
and even more boastful than usual; they felt that they had
powerful friends in high places, and that they were being
openly tolerated by telco security.  But BellSouth's
Intrusion Task Force were hot on the trail of LoD and
sparing no effort or expense.

     The Atlanta Three had also been identified by name
and listed on the extensive anti-hacker files maintained,
and retailed for pay, by private security operative John
Maxfield of Detroit.  Maxfield, who had extensive ties to
telco security and many informants in the underground,
was a bete noire of the *Phrack* crowd, and the dislike was
mutual.

     The Atlanta Three themselves had written articles for
*Phrack.*  This boastful act could not possibly escape telco
and law enforcement attention.

     "Knightmare," a high-school age hacker from
Arizona,  was a close friend and disciple of Atlanta LoD,
but he had been nabbed by the formidable Arizona
Organized Crime and Racketeering Unit.   Knightmare
was on some of LoD's favorite boards -- "Black Ice" in
particular -- and was privy to their secrets.  And to have
Gail Thackeray, the Assistant Attorney General of Arizona,
on one's trail was a dreadful peril for any hacker.

     And perhaps worst of all, Prophet had committed a
major blunder by passing an illicitly copied BellSouth
computer-file to Knight Lightning, who had published it in
*Phrack.*   This, as we will see, was an act of dire
consequence for almost everyone concerned.

     On July 22, 1989, the Secret Service showed up at the
Leftist's house, where he lived with his parents.  A massive
squad of some twenty officers surrounded the building:
Secret Service, federal marshals, local police, possibly
BellSouth telco security; it was hard to tell in the crush.
Leftist's dad, at work in his basement office, first noticed
a
muscular stranger in plain clothes crashing through the
back yard with a drawn pistol.   As more strangers poured
into the house, Leftist's dad naturally assumed there was
an armed robbery in progress.

     Like most hacker parents, Leftist's mom and dad had
only the vaguest notions of what their son had been up to
all this time.   Leftist had a day-job repairing computer
hardware.  His obsession with computers seemed a bit
odd, but harmless enough, and likely to produce a well-
paying career.  The sudden, overwhelming raid left
Leftist's parents traumatized.

     The Leftist himself had been out after work with his
co-workers, surrounding a couple of pitchers of
margaritas.  As he came trucking on tequila-numbed feet
up the pavement, toting a bag full of floppy-disks, he
noticed a large number of unmarked cars parked in his
driveway.  All the cars sported tiny microwave antennas.

     The Secret Service had knocked the front door off its
hinges, almost flattening his Mom.

     Inside, Leftist was greeted by Special Agent James
Cool of the US Secret Service, Atlanta office.  Leftist was
flabbergasted.  He'd never met a Secret Service agent
before.   He could not imagine that he'd ever done
anything worthy of federal attention.  He'd always figured
that if his activities became intolerable, one of his
contacts
in telco security would give him a private phone-call and
tell him to knock it off.

     But now Leftist was pat-searched for weapons by grim
professionals, and his bag of floppies was quickly seized.
He and his parents were all shepherded into separate
rooms and grilled at length as a score of officers scoured
their home for anything electronic.

     Leftist was horrified as his treasured IBM AT
personal computer with its forty-meg hard disk, and his
recently purchased 80386 IBM-clone with a  whopping
hundred-meg hard disk, both went swiftly out the door in
Secret Service custody.  They also seized all his disks, all
his notebooks, and a tremendous booty in dogeared telco
documents that Leftist had snitched out of trash
dumpsters.

     Leftist figured the whole thing for a big
misunderstanding.  He'd never been into *military*
computers.  He wasn't a *spy* or a *Communist.*  He  was
just a good ol' Georgia hacker, and now he just wanted all
these people out of the house.  But it seemed they
wouldn't go until he made some kind of statement.

     And so, he levelled with them.

     And that, Leftist said later from his federal prison
camp in Talladega, Alabama, was a big mistake.

     The Atlanta area was unique, in that it had three
members of the Legion of Doom who actually occupied
more or less the same physical  locality.  Unlike the rest
of
LoD, who tended to associate by phone and computer,
Atlanta LoD actually *were* "tightly knit."  It was no real
surprise that the Secret Service agents apprehending
Urvile at the computer-labs at Georgia Tech, would
discover Prophet with him as well.

     Urvile, a 21-year-old Georgia Tech student in polymer
chemistry, posed quite a puzzling case for law
enforcement.  Urvile --  also known as "Necron 99," as well
as other handles, for he tended to change his cover-alias
about once a month -- was both an accomplished hacker
and a fanatic simulation-gamer.

     Simulation games are an unusual hobby; but then
hackers are unusual people, and their favorite pastimes
tend to be somewhat out of the ordinary.  The best-known
American simulation game is probably "Dungeons &
Dragons," a multi-player parlor entertainment played with
paper, maps, pencils, statistical tables and a variety of
oddly-shaped dice.  Players pretend to be heroic
characters exploring a wholly-invented fantasy world.  The
fantasy worlds of simulation gaming are commonly
pseudo-medieval, involving swords and sorcery -- spell-
casting wizards, knights in armor, unicorns and dragons,
demons and goblins.

     Urvile and his fellow gamers  preferred their
fantasies highly technological.   They made use of a game
known as "G.U.R.P.S.,"  the "Generic Universal Role
Playing System," published by a company called Steve
Jackson Games (SJG).

     "G.U.R.P.S."  served as a framework for creating  a
wide variety of artificial fantasy worlds.  Steve Jackson
Games published  a smorgasboard of books, full of
detailed information and gaming hints, which were used
to flesh-out many different fantastic backgrounds for  the
basic GURPS framework.  Urvile made extensive use of
two SJG books called *GURPS High-Tech*  and *GURPS
Special Ops.*

     In the artificial fantasy-world of *GURPS Special
Ops,*  players entered a modern  fantasy of intrigue and
international espionage.   On beginning the game, players
started small and powerless, perhaps as minor-league CIA
agents or penny-ante arms dealers.   But as players
persisted through a series of game sessions (game
sessions generally lasted for hours, over long, elaborate
campaigns that might be pursued for months on end)
then they would achieve new skills, new knowledge, new
power.  They would acquire and hone new abilities, such as
marksmanship, karate, wiretapping, or Watergate
burglary.  They could also win various kinds of imaginary
booty, like Berettas, or martini shakers, or fast cars with
ejection seats and machine-guns under the headlights.

     As might be imagined from the complexity of these
games, Urvile's gaming notes were very detailed and
extensive.  Urvile was a "dungeon-master," inventing
scenarios for his fellow gamers, giant simulated
adventure-puzzles for his friends to unravel.   Urvile's
game notes covered dozens of pages with all sorts of exotic
lunacy, all about ninja raids on Libya and break-ins on
encrypted Red Chinese supercomputers.   His notes were
written on scrap-paper and kept in loose-leaf binders.

     The handiest scrap paper around Urvile's college
digs were the many pounds of BellSouth printouts and
documents that he had snitched out of telco dumpsters.
His notes were written on the back of misappropriated
telco property.   Worse yet, the gaming notes were
chaotically interspersed with Urvile's hand-scrawled
records involving  *actual computer intrusions*  that he
had committed.

     Not only was it next to impossible to tell Urvile's
fantasy game-notes from cyberspace "reality," but Urvile
himself barely made this distinction.  It's no exaggeration
to say that to Urvile it was *all* a game.   Urvile was very
bright, highly imaginative, and quite careless of other
people's notions of propriety.  His connection to "reality"
was not something to which he paid a great deal of
attention.

     Hacking was a game for Urvile.  It was an amusement
he was carrying out, it was something he was doing for fun.
And  Urvile was an obsessive young man.  He could no
more stop hacking than he could stop in the middle of a
jigsaw puzzle, or stop in the middle of reading a Stephen
Donaldson fantasy trilogy.  (The name "Urvile" came from
a best-selling Donaldson novel.)

     Urvile's airy, bulletproof attitude seriously annoyed
his interrogators.   First of all, he didn't consider that
he'd
done anything wrong.  There was scarcely a shred of
honest remorse in him.   On the contrary, he seemed
privately convinced that his police interrogators were
operating in a demented fantasy-world all their own.
Urvile was too polite and well-behaved to say this straight-
out, but his reactions were askew and disquieting.

     For instance, there was the business about LoD's
ability to monitor phone-calls to the police and Secret
Service.  Urvile agreed that this was quite possible, and
posed no big problem for LoD.  In fact, he and his friends
had kicked the idea around on the "Black Ice" board,
much as they had discussed many other nifty notions,
such as building personal flame-throwers and jury-rigging
fistfulls of blasting-caps.  They had hundreds of dial-up
numbers for government agencies that they'd gotten
through scanning Atlanta phones, or had pulled from
raided VAX/VMS mainframe computers.

     Basically, they'd never gotten around to listening in
on the cops because the idea wasn't interesting enough to
bother with.  Besides, if they'd been monitoring Secret
Service phone calls, obviously they'd never have been
caught in the first place.  Right?

     The Secret Service was less than satisfied with this
rapier-like hacker logic.

     Then there was the issue of crashing the phone
system.  No problem, Urvile admitted sunnily.   Atlanta
LoD could have shut down phone service all over Atlanta
any time they liked.   *Even the 911 service?*   Nothing
special about that, Urvile explained patiently.   Bring the
switch to its knees, with say the UNIX "makedir" bug, and
911 goes down too as a matter of course.  The 911 system
wasn't very interesting, frankly.   It might be tremendously
interesting to cops (for odd reasons of their own), but as
technical challenges went, the 911 service was yawnsville.

     So of course the Atlanta Three could crash service.
They probably could have crashed service all over
BellSouth territory, if they'd worked at it for a while.
But
Atlanta LoD weren't crashers.   Only losers and rodents
were crashers.  LoD were *elite.*

       Urvile was privately convinced that sheer technical
expertise could win him free of any kind of problem.  As
far as he was concerned, elite status in the digital
underground had placed him permanently beyond the
intellectual grasp of cops and straights.  Urvile had a lot
to
learn.

     Of the three LoD stalwarts, Prophet was in the most
direct trouble.  Prophet was a UNIX programming expert
who burrowed in and out of the Internet as a matter of
course.   He'd started his hacking career at around age 14,
meddling with a UNIX mainframe system at the
University of North Carolina.

     Prophet himself had written the handy Legion of
Doom file "UNIX Use and Security From the Ground Up."
UNIX  (pronounced "you-nicks")  is a powerful, flexible
computer operating-system, for multi-user, multi-tasking
computers.   In 1969, when UNIX was created in Bell Labs,
such computers were exclusive to large corporations and
universities, but today UNIX is run on thousands of
powerful home machines.  UNIX was particularly well-
suited to telecommunications programming, and had
become a standard in the field.   Naturally, UNIX also
became a standard for the elite hacker and phone phreak.

     Lately, Prophet had not been so active as Leftist and
Urvile, but Prophet was a recidivist.   In 1986, when he was
eighteen, Prophet had been convicted of "unauthorized
access to a computer network" in North Carolina.  He'd
been discovered breaking into the Southern Bell Data
Network, a UNIX-based internal telco network supposedly
closed to the public.  He'd gotten a typical hacker
sentence:  six months suspended, 120 hours community
service, and three years' probation.

     After that humiliating bust, Prophet had gotten rid of
most of his tonnage of illicit phreak and hacker data, and
had tried to go straight.  He was, after all, still on
probation.
But by  the autumn of 1988, the temptations of cyberspace
had proved too much for young Prophet, and he was
shoulder-to-shoulder with Urvile and Leftist into some of
the hairiest systems around.

     In early September 1988, he'd broken into BellSouth's
centralized automation system, AIMSX or "Advanced
Information Management System."     AIMSX was an
internal business network for BellSouth, where telco
employees stored electronic mail, databases, memos, and
calendars, and did text processing.   Since AIMSX did not
have public dial-ups, it was considered utterly invisible to
the public, and was not well-secured -- it didn't even
require passwords.   Prophet abused an account known as
"waa1," the personal account of an unsuspecting telco
employee.   Disguised as the owner of waa1, Prophet made
about ten visits to AIMSX.

     Prophet did not damage or delete anything in the
system.  His presence in AIMSX was harmless and almost
invisible.  But he could not rest content with that.

     One particular piece of processed text on AIMSX was
a telco document known as "Bell South Standard Practice
660-225-104SV Control Office Administration of Enhanced
911 Services for Special Services and Major Account
Centers dated March 1988."

     Prophet had not been looking for this document.  It
was merely one among hundreds of similar documents
with impenetrable titles.  However, having blundered over
it in the course of his illicit wanderings through AIMSX, he
decided to take it with him as a trophy.  It might prove
very
useful in some future boasting, bragging, and strutting
session.   So,  some time in September 1988, Prophet
ordered the AIMSX mainframe computer to copy this
document (henceforth called simply  called "the E911
Document")  and  to transfer this copy to his home
computer.

     No one noticed that Prophet had done this.  He had
"stolen" the E911 Document in some sense, but notions of
property in cyberspace can be tricky.   BellSouth noticed
nothing wrong, because BellSouth still had their original
copy.  They had not been "robbed" of the document itself.
Many people were supposed to copy this document --
specifically, people who worked for the nineteen BellSouth
"special services and major account centers," scattered
throughout the Southeastern United States.  That was
what it was for, why it was present on a computer network
in the first place: so that it could be copied and read --
by
telco employees.   But now the data had been copied by
someone who wasn't supposed to look at it.

     Prophet now had his trophy.  But he further decided
to store yet another copy of the E911 Document on
another person's computer.  This unwitting person was a
computer enthusiast named Richard Andrews who lived
near Joliet, Illinois.  Richard Andrews was a UNIX
programmer by trade, and ran a powerful UNIX board
called "Jolnet," in the basement of his house.

     Prophet, using the handle "Robert Johnson," had
obtained an account on Richard Andrews' computer.  And
there he stashed the E911 Document, by storing it in his
own private section of Andrews' computer.

     Why did Prophet do this?  If Prophet had eliminated
the E911 Document from his own computer, and kept it
hundreds of miles away, on another machine, under an
alias, then he might have been fairly safe from discovery
and prosecution -- although his sneaky action had
certainly put the unsuspecting Richard Andrews at risk.

     But, like most hackers, Prophet was a pack-rat for
illicit data.  When it came to the crunch, he could not bear
to part from his trophy.   When Prophet's place in
Decatur, Georgia was raided in July 1989, there was the
E911 Document, a smoking gun.  And there was Prophet in
the hands of the Secret Service, doing his best to
"explain."

     Our story now takes us away from the Atlanta Three
and their raids of the Summer of 1989.  We must leave
Atlanta Three "cooperating fully" with their numerous
investigators.  And  all three of them did cooperate, as
their  Sentencing Memorandum from the US District
Court of the Northern Division of Georgia explained  --
just before all three of them were sentenced to various
federal prisons in November 1990.

     We must now catch up on the other aspects of the
war on the Legion of Doom.   The war on the Legion was a
war on a network -- in fact, a network of three networks,
which intertwined and interrelated in a complex fashion.
The Legion itself, with Atlanta LoD, and their hanger-on
Fry Guy, were the first network.  The second network was
*Phrack* magazine, with its editors and contributors.

     The third  network involved the electronic circle
around a  hacker known as "Terminus."

     The war against these hacker networks was carried
out by a law enforcement network.  Atlanta LoD  and Fry
Guy were pursued by USSS agents and federal
prosecutors in Atlanta, Indiana, and Chicago.  "Terminus"
found himself pursued by USSS and  federal prosecutors
from Baltimore and Chicago.  And the war against Phrack
was almost entirely a Chicago operation.

     The investigation of Terminus involved a great deal
of energy, mostly from the Chicago Task Force, but it was
to be the least-known and least-publicized of the
Crackdown operations.  Terminus, who lived in Maryland,
was a UNIX programmer and consultant, fairly well-
known (under his given name)  in the UNIX community,
as an acknowledged expert on AT&T minicomputers.
Terminus idolized AT&T, especially Bellcore, and longed
for public recognition as a UNIX expert; his highest
ambition was to work for Bell Labs.

     But Terminus had odd friends and a spotted history.
Terminus had once been  the subject of an admiring
interview in *Phrack* (Volume II, Issue 14, Phile 2  --
dated
May 1987).   In this article, *Phrack* co-editor Taran King
described "Terminus" as an electronics engineer,  5'9",
brown-haired, born in 1959 -- at 28 years old, quite mature
for a hacker.

     Terminus had once been sysop of a phreak/hack
underground board called "MetroNet," which ran on an
Apple II.  Later he'd replaced "MetroNet" with an
underground board called "MegaNet," specializing in
IBMs.  In his younger days, Terminus had written one of
the very first and most elegant code-scanning programs
for the IBM-PC.  This program had been widely
distributed in the underground.  Uncounted legions of PC-
owning  phreaks and hackers had used Terminus's
scanner  program to rip-off telco codes.  This  feat had not
escaped the attention of telco security; it hardly could,
since Terminus's earlier handle, "Terminal Technician,"
was proudly written right on the program.

     When he became a full-time computer professional
(specializing in telecommunications programming),  he
adopted the handle Terminus, meant to indicate that he
had "reached the final point of being a proficient hacker."
He'd moved up to the UNIX-based "Netsys" board on an
AT&T computer, with four phone lines and an impressive
240 megs of storage.   "Netsys" carried complete issues of
*Phrack,* and Terminus was quite friendly with its
publishers, Taran King and Knight Lightning.

     In the early 1980s, Terminus had been a regular on
Plovernet, Pirate-80, Sherwood Forest and Shadowland, all
well-known pirate boards, all heavily frequented by the
Legion of Doom.   As it happened, Terminus was never
officially "in LoD," because he'd never been given the
official LoD high-sign and back-slap by Legion maven Lex
Luthor.   Terminus had never physically met anyone from
LoD.  But that scarcely mattered much -- the Atlanta
Three themselves had never been officially vetted by Lex,
either.

     As far as law enforcement was concerned, the issues
were clear. Terminus was a full-time, adult computer
professional with particular skills at AT&T software and
hardware -- but Terminus reeked of the Legion of Doom
and the underground.

     On February 1, 1990 -- half a month after the Martin
Luther King Day Crash --  USSS  agents Tim Foley from
Chicago, and Jack Lewis from the Baltimore office,
accompanied by AT&T security officer Jerry Dalton,
travelled to Middle Town, Maryland.  There they grilled
Terminus in his home (to the stark terror of his wife and
small children), and, in their customary fashion, hauled
his computers out the door.

     The Netsys machine proved to contain a plethora of
arcane UNIX software -- proprietary source code formally
owned by AT&T.  Software such as:  UNIX System Five
Release 3.2; UNIX SV Release 3.1;  UUCP
communications software; KORN SHELL; RFS; IWB;
WWB; DWB; the C++ programming language; PMON;
TOOL CHEST; QUEST; DACT, and S FIND.

     In the long-established piratical tradition of the
underground,  Terminus had been trading this illicitly-
copied  software with a small circle of fellow UNIX
programmers.   Very unwisely, he had stored seven years
of his electronic mail on his Netsys machine, which
documented all the friendly arrangements he had made
with his various colleagues.

     Terminus had not crashed the AT&T phone system
on January 15.  He was, however, blithely running a not-
for-profit AT&T software-piracy ring.  This was not an
activity AT&T found amusing.   AT&T security officer Jerry
Dalton valued this "stolen" property at over three hundred
thousand dollars.

     AT&T's entry into the tussle of free enterprise had
been complicated by the new, vague groundrules of the
information economy.   Until the break-up of Ma Bell,
AT&T was forbidden to sell computer hardware or
software.  Ma Bell was the phone company; Ma Bell was
not allowed to use the enormous revenue from telephone
utilities, in order to finance any entry into the computer
market.

     AT&T nevertheless invented the UNIX operating
system.   And somehow AT&T managed to make UNIX a
minor source of income.  Weirdly, UNIX was not sold as
computer software, but actually retailed under an obscure
regulatory exemption allowing sales of surplus equipment
and scrap.  Any bolder attempt to promote or retail UNIX
would have aroused angry legal opposition from computer
companies.  Instead, UNIX was licensed to universities, at
modest rates, where the acids of academic freedom ate
away steadily at AT&T's proprietary rights.

     Come the breakup, AT&T recognized that UNIX was
a potential gold-mine.   By now, large chunks of UNIX
code had been created that were not AT&T's, and were
being sold by others.  An entire rival UNIX-based
operating system had arisen in Berkeley, California  (one
of the world's great founts of ideological hackerdom).
Today, "hackers" commonly consider "Berkeley UNIX" to
be technically superior to AT&T's "System V UNIX," but
AT&T has not allowed mere technical elegance to intrude
on the real-world business of marketing proprietary
software.   AT&T has made its own code deliberately
incompatible with other folks' UNIX, and has written code
that it can prove is copyrightable, even if that code
happens to be somewhat awkward -- "kludgey."   AT&T
UNIX user licenses are serious business agreements,
replete with very clear copyright statements and non-
disclosure clauses.

     AT&T has not exactly kept the UNIX cat in the bag,
but it kept a grip on its scruff with some success.   By the
rampant, explosive standards of software piracy, AT&T
UNIX source code is heavily copyrighted, well-guarded,
well-licensed.   UNIX was traditionally run only on
mainframe machines, owned by large groups of suit-and-
tie professionals, rather than on bedroom machines where
people can get up to easy mischief.

     And AT&T UNIX source code is serious high-level
programming.   The number of skilled UNIX
programmers with any actual motive to swipe UNIX
source code is small.  It's tiny, compared to the tens of
thousands prepared to rip-off, say, entertaining PC games
like "Leisure Suit Larry."

     But by 1989, the warez-d00d underground, in the
persons of Terminus and his friends,  was gnawing at
AT&T UNIX.  And the property in question was not sold
for twenty bucks over the counter at the local branch of
Babbage's or Egghead's;  this was massive, sophisticated,
multi-line, multi-author corporate code worth tens of
thousands of dollars.

     It must be recognized at this point that Terminus's
purported ring of UNIX software pirates had not actually
made any money from their suspected crimes.  The
$300,000 dollar figure bandied about for the contents of
Terminus's computer did not mean that Terminus was in
actual illicit possession of three hundred thousand of
AT&T's  dollars.   Terminus was shipping software back
and forth, privately, person to person, for free.  He was
not
making a commercial business of piracy.  He hadn't asked
for money; he didn't take money.  He lived quite modestly.

     AT&T employees -- as well as freelance UNIX
consultants, like Terminus -- commonly worked with
"proprietary" AT&T software, both in the office and at
home on their private machines.   AT&T rarely sent
security officers out to comb the hard disks of its
consultants.   Cheap freelance UNIX  contractors were
quite useful to AT&T; they didn't have health insurance or
retirement programs, much less union membership in the
Communication Workers of America.  They were humble
digital drudges, wandering with mop and bucket through
the Great Technological Temple of AT&T; but when the
Secret Service arrived at their homes, it seemed they were
eating with company silverware and sleeping on company
sheets!  Outrageously, they behaved as if the things they
worked with every day belonged to them!

     And these were no mere hacker teenagers with their
hands full of trash-paper and their noses pressed to the
corporate windowpane.  These guys were UNIX wizards,
not only carrying AT&T data in their machines and their
heads, but eagerly networking about it, over machines that
were far more powerful than anything previously
imagined in private hands.  How do you keep people
disposable, yet assure their awestruck respect for your
property?  It was a dilemma.

       Much UNIX code was public-domain, available for
free.   Much "proprietary" UNIX code had been
extensively re-written, perhaps altered so much that it
became an entirely new product -- or perhaps not.
Intellectual property rights for software developers were,
and are, extraordinarily complex and confused.   And
software "piracy," like the private copying of videos, is
one
of the most widely practiced "crimes" in the world today.

     The USSS were not experts in UNIX or familiar with
the customs of its use.   The United States Secret Service,
considered as a body, did not have one single person in it
who could program in a UNIX environment -- no, not even
one.   The Secret Service *were* making extensive use of
expert help, but the "experts" they had chosen were AT&T
and Bellcore security officials, the very victims of the
purported crimes under investigation, the very people
whose interest in AT&T's  "proprietary" software was most
pronounced.

     On February 6, 1990, Terminus was arrested by Agent
Lewis.  Eventually, Terminus would be sent to prison for
his illicit use of a piece of AT&T software.

     The issue of pirated AT&T software would bubble
along in the background during the war on the Legion of
Doom.  Some half-dozen of Terminus's on-line
acquaintances, including people in Illinois, Texas and
California, were grilled by the Secret Service in connection
with the illicit copying of software.   Except for Terminus,
however, none were charged with a crime.  None of them
shared his peculiar prominence in the hacker
underground.

     But that did not meant that these people would, or
could, stay out of trouble.   The transferral of illicit
data in
cyberspace is hazy and ill-defined business, with
paradoxical dangers for everyone concerned:  hackers,
signal carriers, board owners,  cops, prosecutors, even
random passers-by.  Sometimes, well-meant attempts to
avert trouble  or punish wrongdoing bring more trouble
than  would simple ignorance, indifference or impropriety.

     Terminus's "Netsys" board was not a common-or-
garden bulletin board system, though it had most of the
usual functions of a board.  Netsys was not a stand-alone
machine, but part of the globe-spanning  "UUCP"
cooperative network.  The UUCP network uses a set of
Unix software programs called "Unix-to-Unix Copy," which
allows Unix systems to throw data to one another at high
speed through the public telephone network.   UUCP is a
radically decentralized, not-for-profit network of UNIX
computers.   There are tens of thousands of these UNIX
machines.  Some are small, but many are powerful and
also link to other networks.  UUCP has certain arcane links
to  major networks such as JANET, EasyNet, BITNET,
JUNET, VNET, DASnet, PeaceNet and FidoNet, as well as
the gigantic Internet.  (The so-called "Internet" is not
actually a network itself, but rather an "internetwork"
connections standard that allows several globe-spanning
computer networks to communicate with one another.
Readers fascinated by the weird and intricate tangles of
modern computer networks may enjoy John S.
Quarterman's authoritative 719-page explication, *The
Matrix,* Digital Press, 1990.)

     A skilled user of Terminus' UNIX machine could
send and receive electronic mail from almost any major
computer network in the world.  Netsys was not called a
"board" per se, but rather a "node."   "Nodes" were larger,
faster, and more sophisticated than mere "boards," and
for hackers, to hang out on internationally-connected
"nodes" was quite the step up from merely hanging out on
local "boards."

     Terminus's Netsys node in Maryland had a number
of direct links to other, similar UUCP  nodes, run by
people who shared his interests and at least something of
his free-wheeling attitude.   One of these nodes was Jolnet,
owned by Richard Andrews, who, like Terminus, was an
independent UNIX consultant.   Jolnet also ran UNIX, and
could be contacted at high speed by mainframe machines
from all over the world.  Jolnet was quite a sophisticated
piece of work, technically speaking, but it was still run by
an individual, as a private, not-for-profit hobby.   Jolnet
was
mostly used by other UNIX programmers -- for mail,
storage, and access to networks.  Jolnet supplied access
network access to about two hundred people, as well as a
local junior college.

     Among its various features and services, Jolnet also
carried *Phrack* magazine.

     For reasons of his own, Richard Andrews had become
suspicious of a new user called  "Robert Johnson."  Richard
Andrews took it upon himself to have a look at what
"Robert Johnson" was storing in Jolnet.  And Andrews
found the E911 Document.

     "Robert Johnson" was the Prophet from the Legion of
Doom, and the E911 Document was illicitly copied data
from Prophet's raid on the BellSouth computers.

     The E911 Document, a particularly illicit piece of
digital property, was about to resume its long, complex,
and disastrous career.

     It struck Andrews as fishy that someone not a
telephone employee should have a document referring to
the "Enhanced 911 System."  Besides,  the document itself
bore an obvious warning.

     "WARNING:  NOT FOR USE OR DISCLOSURE
OUTSIDE BELLSOUTH OR ANY OF ITS SUBSIDIARIES
EXCEPT UNDER WRITTEN AGREEMENT."

     These standard nondisclosure tags are often
appended to all sorts of corporate material.   Telcos as a
species are particularly notorious for stamping most
everything in sight as "not for use or disclosure."  Still,
this
particular piece of data was  about the 911 System.  That
sounded bad to  Rich Andrews.

     Andrews was not prepared to ignore this sort of
trouble.  He thought it would be wise to pass the document
along to a friend and acquaintance on the UNIX network,
for consultation.  So, around September 1988, Andrews
sent yet another copy of the E911 Document electronically
to an AT&T employee, one Charles Boykin, who ran a
UNIX-based node called "attctc" in Dallas, Texas.

     "Attctc" was the property of AT&T, and was run from
AT&T's Customer Technology Center  in Dallas, hence the
name "attctc."  "Attctc" was better-known as "Killer," the
name of the machine that the system was running on.
"Killer" was a hefty, powerful, AT&T 3B2 500 model, a
multi-user, multi-tasking UNIX platform with 32 meg of
memory and a mind-boggling 3.2 Gigabytes of storage.
When  Killer had first arrived in Texas, in 1985, the 3B2
had been one of AT&T's great white hopes for going head-
to-head with IBM for the corporate computer-hardware
market.  "Killer" had been shipped to the Customer
Technology Center in the Dallas Infomart, essentially a
high-technology mall, and there it sat, a demonstration
model.

     Charles Boykin, a veteran AT&T hardware and digital
communications expert, was a local technical backup man
for the AT&T 3B2 system.   As a display model in the
Infomart mall, "Killer" had little to do, and it seemed a
shame to waste the system's capacity.  So Boykin
ingeniously wrote some UNIX bulletin-board software for
"Killer," and plugged the machine in to the local phone
network.   "Killer's" debut in late 1985 made it the first
publicly available UNIX site in the state of Texas.  Anyone
who wanted to play was welcome.

     The machine immediately attracted an electronic
community.  It joined the UUCP network, and offered
network links to over eighty other computer sites, all of
which became dependent on Killer for their links to the
greater world of cyberspace.   And it wasn't just for the
big
guys; personal computer users also stored freeware
programs for the Amiga, the Apple, the IBM and the
Macintosh on Killer's vast 3,200 meg archives.  At one
time, Killer had the largest library of public-domain
Macintosh software in Texas.

     Eventually, Killer attracted about 1,500 users, all
busily communicating, uploading and downloading,
getting mail, gossipping, and linking to arcane and distant
networks.

       Boykin received no pay for running Killer.  He
considered it good publicity for the AT&T 3B2 system
(whose sales were somewhat less than stellar), but he also
simply enjoyed the vibrant community his skill had
created.   He gave away the bulletin-board UNIX software
he had written, free of charge.

     In the UNIX programming community, Charlie
Boykin had the reputation of a warm, open-hearted, level-
headed kind of guy.   In 1989, a group of Texan UNIX
professionals voted Boykin "System Administrator of the
Year."   He was considered a fellow you could trust for
good advice.

     In September 1988, without warning, the E911
Document came plunging into Boykin's life, forwarded by
Richard Andrews.  Boykin immediately recognized that
the Document was hot property.   He was not a voice-
communications man, and knew little about the ins and
outs of the Baby Bells, but he certainly knew what the 911
System was, and he was angry to see confidential data
about it in the hands of a nogoodnik.  This was clearly a
matter for telco security.  So, on September 21, 1988,
Boykin made yet *another* copy of the  E911 Document
and passed this one along to a professional acquaintance
of his, one Jerome Dalton, from AT&T Corporate
Information Security.   Jerry Dalton was the very fellow
who would later raid Terminus's house.

     From AT&T's security division, the E911 Document
went to Bellcore.

     Bellcore (or BELL COmmunications REsearch)  had
once been the central laboratory of the Bell System.  Bell
Labs employees had invented the UNIX operating
system.  Now Bellcore was a quasi-independent, jointly
owned company that  acted as the research arm for all
seven of the Baby Bell RBOCs.   Bellcore was in a good
position to co-ordinate security technology and
consultation for the RBOCs, and the gentleman in charge
of this effort was Henry M. Kluepfel, a veteran of the Bell
System who had worked there for twenty-four years.

     On October  13, 1988, Dalton passed the E911
Document to Henry Kluepfel.  Kluepfel, a veteran expert
witness in telecommunications fraud and computer-fraud
cases, had certainly seen worse trouble than this.   He
recognized the document for what it was:  a trophy from a
hacker break-in.

     However, whatever harm had been done in the
intrusion was presumably old news.   At this point there
seemed little to be done.  Kluepfel made a careful note of
the circumstances and shelved the problem for the time
being.

     Whole months passed.

     February 1989 arrived.  The Atlanta Three were living
it up in Bell South's switches, and had not yet met their
comeuppance.   The Legion was thriving.  So was *Phrack*
magazine.   A good six months had passed since Prophet's
AIMSX break-in.  Prophet, as hackers will, grew weary of
sitting on his laurels.  "Knight Lightning" and "Taran
King,"  the editors of *Phrack,* were always begging
Prophet for material they could publish.   Prophet decided
that the heat must be off by this time, and that he could
safely brag, boast, and strut.

     So he sent a copy of the E911 Document -- yet
another one -- from Rich Andrews' Jolnet machine to
Knight Lightning's  BITnet account at the University of
Missouri.

     Let's review the fate of the document so far.

     0.  The original E911 Document.  This in the AIMSX
system on a mainframe computer in Atlanta, available to
hundreds of people, but all of them, presumably,
BellSouth employees.   An unknown number of them may
have their own copies of this document, but they are all
professionals and all trusted by the phone company.

     1.  Prophet's illicit copy, at home on his own computer
in Decatur, Georgia.

     2.  Prophet's back-up copy, stored on Rich Andrew's
Jolnet machine in the basement of Rich Andrews'  house
near Joliet Illinois.

     3.  Charles Boykin's copy on "Killer" in Dallas, Texas,
sent by Rich Andrews from Joliet.

     4.  Jerry Dalton's copy at AT&T Corporate
Information Security in New Jersey, sent from Charles
Boykin in Dallas.

     5.  Henry Kluepfel's copy at Bellcore security
headquarters in New Jersey, sent by Dalton.

     6.  Knight Lightning's copy, sent by Prophet from
Rich Andrews' machine, and now in Columbia, Missouri.

      We can see that the "security" situation of this
proprietary document, once dug out of AIMSX,  swiftly
became bizarre.   Without any money changing hands,
without any particular special effort, this data had been
reproduced at least six times and had spread itself all over
the continent.  By far the worst, however, was yet to come.

     In February 1989, Prophet and Knight Lightning
bargained electronically over the fate of this trophy.
Prophet wanted to boast, but, at the same time, scarcely
wanted to be caught.

     For his part, Knight Lightning was eager to publish as
much of the document as he could manage.   Knight
Lightning was a fledgling political-science major with a
particular interest in freedom-of-information issues.  He
would gladly publish most anything that would reflect
glory on the prowess of the underground and embarrass
the telcos.   However, Knight Lightning himself had
contacts in telco security, and sometimes consulted them
on material he'd received that might be too dicey for
publication.

     Prophet and  Knight Lightning decided to edit the
E911 Document so as  to delete most of its identifying
traits.   First of all, its large "NOT FOR USE OR
DISCLOSURE" warning had to go.  Then there were other
matters.  For instance, it listed the office telephone
numbers of several BellSouth 911 specialists in Florida.  If
these phone numbers were published in *Phrack,* the
BellSouth employees involved would very likely be
hassled by phone phreaks, which would anger BellSouth
no end, and pose a definite operational hazard for both
Prophet and *Phrack.*

     So Knight Lightning cut the Document almost in half,
removing the phone numbers and some of the touchier
and more specific information.  He passed it back
electronically to Prophet;  Prophet was still nervous, so
Knight Lightning cut a bit more.  They finally agreed that
it was ready to go, and that it would be published in
*Phrack* under the pseudonym, "The Eavesdropper."

     And this was done on February 25, 1989.

     The twenty-fourth issue of *Phrack*  featured a chatty
interview with co-ed phone-phreak "Chanda Leir," three
articles on BITNET and its links to other computer
networks,  an article on 800 and 900 numbers by "Unknown
User,"  "VaxCat's" article on telco basics (slyly entitled
"Lifting Ma Bell's Veil of Secrecy,)" and the usual "Phrack
World News."

     The News section, with painful irony, featured an
extended account of the sentencing of "Shadowhawk,"  an
eighteen-year-old Chicago hacker who had just been put
in federal prison by William J. Cook himself.

     And then there were the two articles by "The
Eavesdropper."   The first was the  edited E911 Document,
now titled "Control Office Administration Of Enhanced
911 Services for Special Services and Major Account
Centers."  Eavesdropper's second article was a glossary of
terms explaining the blizzard of telco acronyms and
buzzwords in the E911 Document.

     The hapless document was now distributed, in the
usual *Phrack* routine, to a good one hundred and fifty
sites.  Not a hundred and fifty *people,* mind you -- a
hundred and fifty *sites,* some of these sites linked to
UNIX nodes or bulletin board systems, which themselves
had readerships of tens, dozens, even hundreds of people.

     This was February 1989.  Nothing happened
immediately.  Summer came, and the Atlanta crew were
raided by the Secret Service.   Fry Guy was apprehended.
Still nothing whatever happened to *Phrack.* Six more
issues of *Phrack* came out, 30 in all, more or less on a
monthly schedule.  Knight Lightning and co-editor Taran
King went untouched.

     *Phrack* tended to duck and cover whenever the
heat came down.  During the summer busts of 1987 --
(hacker busts tended to cluster in summer, perhaps
because hackers were easier to find at home than in
college) -- *Phrack* had ceased publication for several
months, and laid low.   Several LoD hangers-on had been
arrested, but nothing had happened to the *Phrack*  crew,
the premiere gossips of the underground.  In 1988,
*Phrack* had been taken over by a new editor, "Crimson
Death," a raucous youngster with a taste for anarchy files.

      1989, however, looked like a bounty year for the
underground.  Knight Lightning and his co-editor Taran
King took up the reins again, and *Phrack* flourished
throughout 1989.   Atlanta LoD went down hard in the
summer of 1989, but *Phrack* rolled merrily on.   Prophet's
E911 Document seemed unlikely to cause *Phrack* any
trouble.  By January 1990, it had been available in
*Phrack* for almost a year.   Kluepfel and Dalton, officers
of Bellcore and AT&T  security, had possessed the
document for sixteen months -- in fact, they'd had it even
before Knight Lightning himself, and had done nothing in
particular to stop its distribution.  They hadn't even told
Rich Andrews or Charles Boykin to erase the copies from
their UNIX nodes, Jolnet and Killer.

     But then came the monster Martin Luther King Day
Crash of January 15, 1990.

     A flat three days later, on January 18,  four agents
showed up at Knight Lightning's fraternity house.   One
was Timothy Foley, the second Barbara Golden, both of
them Secret Service agents from the Chicago office.   Also
along was a University of Missouri security officer, and
Reed Newlin, a security man from Southwestern Bell, the
RBOC having jurisdiction over Missouri.

     Foley accused Knight Lightning of causing the
nationwide crash of the phone system.

     Knight Lightning was aghast at this allegation.   On
the face of it, the suspicion was not entirely implausible -
-
though Knight Lightning knew that he himself hadn't
done it.   Plenty of hot-dog hackers had bragged that they
could crash the phone system, however.  "Shadowhawk,"
for instance, the Chicago hacker whom William Cook had
recently put in jail, had several times  boasted on boards
that he could "shut down AT&T's public switched
network."

      And now this event, or something that looked just
like it, had actually taken place.  The Crash had lit a fire
under the Chicago Task Force.  And the former fence-
sitters at Bellcore and AT&T were now ready to roll.  The
consensus among telco security -- already horrified by the
skill of the BellSouth intruders  -- was that the digital
underground was out of hand.  LoD and *Phrack* must go.

     And in publishing Prophet's E911 Document,
*Phrack* had provided law enforcement with what
appeared to be a powerful legal weapon.

     Foley confronted Knight Lightning about the  E911
Document.

     Knight Lightning was cowed.  He immediately began
"cooperating fully" in the usual tradition of the digital
underground.

     He gave Foley a complete run of *Phrack,*printed
out in a set of three-ring binders.   He handed over his
electronic mailing list of *Phrack* subscribers. Knight
Lightning was grilled for four hours by Foley and his
cohorts.  Knight Lightning admitted that Prophet had
passed him the E911 Document, and he admitted that he
had known it was stolen booty from a hacker raid on a
telephone company.  Knight Lightning signed a statement
to this effect, and agreed, in writing, to cooperate with
investigators.

     Next day -- January 19, 1990, a Friday  -- the Secret
Service returned with a search warrant, and thoroughly
searched Knight Lightning's upstairs room in the
fraternity house.   They took all his floppy disks, though,
interestingly, they left Knight Lightning in possession of
both his computer and his modem.  (The computer had no
hard disk, and in Foley's judgement was not a store of
evidence.)   But this was a very minor bright spot among
Knight Lightning's rapidly multiplying troubles.  By this
time, Knight Lightning was in plenty of hot water, not only
with federal police, prosecutors, telco investigators, and
university security, but with the elders of his own campus
fraternity, who were outraged to think that they had been
unwittingly harboring a federal computer-criminal.

     On Monday, Knight Lightning was summoned to
Chicago, where he was further grilled by Foley and USSS
veteran agent Barbara Golden, this time with an attorney
present.  And on Tuesday, he was formally indicted by a
federal grand jury.

     The trial of Knight Lightning, which occurred on July
24-27, 1990, was the crucial show-trial of the Hacker
Crackdown.  We will examine the trial at some length in
Part Four of this book.

     In the meantime, we must continue our dogged
pursuit of the E911 Document.

     It must have been clear by January 1990 that the E911
Document, in the form *Phrack* had published it back in
February 1989, had gone off at the speed of light in at
least
a hundred and fifty different directions.   To attempt to
put
this electronic genie back in the bottle was flatly
impossible.

     And yet, the E911 Document was *still* stolen
property, formally and legally speaking.  Any electronic
transference of this document, by anyone unauthorized to
have it, could be interpreted as an act of wire fraud.
Interstate transfer of stolen property, including electronic
property, was a federal crime.

     The Chicago Computer Fraud and Abuse Task Force
had been assured that the E911 Document was worth a
hefty sum of money.  In fact, they had a precise estimate
of its worth from BellSouth security personnel:  $79,449.
A
sum of this scale seemed to warrant vigorous prosecution.
Even if the damage could not be undone, at least this large
sum offered a good legal pretext for stern punishment of
the thieves.   It seemed likely to impress judges and
juries.
And it could be used in court to mop up the Legion of
Doom.

     The Atlanta crowd was already in the bag, by the time
the Chicago Task Force had gotten around to *Phrack.*
But the Legion was a hydra-headed thing.   In late 89, a
brand-new Legion of Doom board, "Phoenix Project," had
gone up in Austin, Texas.  Phoenix Project was sysoped by
no less a man than the Mentor himself, ably assisted by
University of Texas student and hardened Doomster "Erik
Bloodaxe."

     As we have seen from his *Phrack* manifesto, the
Mentor was a hacker zealot who regarded computer
intrusion as something close to a moral duty.  Phoenix
Project  was an ambitious effort, intended to revive the
digital underground to what Mentor considered the full
flower of the early 80s.  The Phoenix board would also
boldly bring elite hackers face-to-face with the telco
"opposition."  On "Phoenix," America's cleverest hackers
would supposedly shame the telco squareheads out of
their stick-in-the-mud attitudes, and perhaps convince
them that the Legion of Doom elite were really an all-right
crew.  The  premiere of "Phoenix Project" was heavily
trumpeted by *Phrack,* and "Phoenix Project" carried a
complete run of *Phrack* issues, including the E911
Document as *Phrack* had published it.

     Phoenix Project was only one of many -- possibly
hundreds -- of nodes and boards all over America that
were in guilty possession of the E911 Document.  But
Phoenix was an outright, unashamed Legion of Doom
board.  Under Mentor's guidance, it was flaunting itself in
the face of telco security personnel. Worse yet, it was
actively trying to *win them over* as sympathizers for the
digital underground elite.   "Phoenix" had no cards or
codes on it.  Its hacker elite considered Phoenix at least
technically legal.   But Phoenix was a corrupting influence,
where hacker anarchy was eating away like digital acid at
the underbelly of corporate propriety.

     The Chicago Computer Fraud and Abuse Task Force
now prepared to descend upon Austin, Texas.

     Oddly, not one but *two* trails of the Task Force's
investigation led toward Austin.  The city of Austin, like
Atlanta, had made itself a bulwark of the Sunbelt's
Information Age, with a strong university research
presence, and a number of cutting-edge electronics
companies, including Motorola, Dell, CompuAdd, IBM,
Sematech and MCC.

     Where computing machinery went, hackers
generally followed.  Austin boasted not only "Phoenix
Project," currently LoD's most flagrant underground
board, but a number of UNIX  nodes.

     One of these nodes was "Elephant," run by a UNIX
consultant named Robert Izenberg.  Izenberg, in search of
a relaxed Southern lifestyle and a lowered cost-of-living,
had recently migrated to Austin from New Jersey.  In New
Jersey, Izenberg had worked for an independent
contracting company, programming UNIX code for AT&T
itself.  "Terminus" had been a frequent user on Izenberg's
privately owned Elephant node.

     Having interviewed Terminus and examined the
records on Netsys, the Chicago Task Force were now
convinced that they had discovered an underground gang
of UNIX software pirates, who were demonstrably guilty of
interstate trafficking in illicitly copied  AT&T source
code.
Izenberg was swept into the dragnet around Terminus, the
self-proclaimed ultimate UNIX hacker.

     Izenberg, in Austin, had settled down into a UNIX job
with a Texan branch of IBM.  Izenberg was no longer
working as a contractor for AT&T, but he had friends in
New Jersey, and he still logged on to AT&T UNIX
computers back in New Jersey, more or less whenever it
pleased him.  Izenberg's activities appeared highly
suspicious to the Task Force.  Izenberg might well be
breaking into AT&T computers, swiping AT&T software,
and passing it to  Terminus and other possible
confederates, through the UNIX node network.  And this
data was worth, not merely $79,499, but hundreds of
thousands of dollars!

     On February 21, 1990, Robert Izenberg arrived home
from work at IBM to find that all the computers had
mysteriously vanished from his Austin apartment.
Naturally he assumed that he had been robbed.  His
"Elephant" node, his other machines, his notebooks, his
disks, his tapes, all gone!  However, nothing much else
seemed disturbed -- the place had not been ransacked.

     The puzzle becaming much stranger some five
minutes later.   Austin U. S. Secret Service Agent Al Soliz,
accompanied by University of Texas campus-security
officer Larry Coutorie and the ubiquitous Tim Foley, made
their appearance at Izenberg's door.  They were in plain
clothes: slacks, polo shirts.  They came in, and Tim Foley
accused Izenberg of belonging to the Legion of Doom.

     Izenberg told them that he had never heard of the
"Legion of Doom."  And what about a certain stolen E911
Document, that posed a direct threat to the police
emergency lines?   Izenberg claimed that he'd never
heard of that, either.

     His interrogators found this difficult to believe.
Didn't he know Terminus?

     Who?

     They gave him Terminus's real name.  Oh yes, said
Izenberg.  He knew *that* guy all right -- he was leading
discussions on the Internet about AT&T computers,
especially the AT&T 3B2.

     AT&T had thrust this machine into the marketplace,
but, like many of AT&T's ambitious attempts to enter the
computing arena, the 3B2 project had something less than
a glittering success.   Izenberg himself had been a
contractor for the division of AT&T that supported the 3B2.
The entire division had been shut down.

       Nowadays, the cheapest and quickest way to get
help with this fractious piece of machinery was to join one
of Terminus's discussion groups on the Internet, where
friendly and knowledgeable hackers would help you for
free.  Naturally the remarks within this group were less
than flattering about the Death Star....  was *that* the
problem?

     Foley told Izenberg that Terminus had been
acquiring hot software through his, Izenberg's, machine.

     Izenberg shrugged this off.   A good eight megabytes
of data flowed through his UUCP site every day.   UUCP
nodes spewed data like fire hoses.  Elephant had been
directly linked to Netsys -- not surprising, since Terminus
was a 3B2 expert and Izenberg had been a 3B2 contractor.
Izenberg was also linked to "attctc" and the University of
Texas.   Terminus was a well-known UNIX expert, and
might have been up to all manner of hijinks on Elephant.
Nothing Izenberg could do about that.  That was
physically impossible.  Needle in a haystack.

      In a four-hour grilling, Foley urged Izenberg to come
clean and admit that he was in conspiracy with Terminus,
and a member of the Legion of Doom.

     Izenberg denied this.  He was no weirdo teenage
hacker -- he was thirty-two years old, and didn't even have
a "handle."  Izenberg was a former TV technician and
electronics specialist who had drifted into UNIX
consulting as a full-grown adult.   Izenberg had never met
Terminus, physically.  He'd once bought a cheap high-
speed modem from him, though.

     Foley told him that this modem (a Telenet T2500
which ran at 19.2 kilobaud, and which had just gone out
Izenberg's door in Secret Service custody)  was likely hot
property.  Izenberg was taken aback to hear this; but then
again, most of Izenberg's equipment, like that of most
freelance professionals in the industry, was discounted,
passed hand-to-hand through various kinds of barter and
gray-market.   There was no proof that the modem was
stolen, and even if it was, Izenberg hardly saw how that
gave them the right to take every electronic item in his
house.

      Still, if the United States Secret Service figured
they
needed his computer for national security reasons -- or
whatever -- then Izenberg would not kick.  He figured he
would somehow make the sacrifice of his twenty thousand
dollars' worth of professional equipment, in the spirit of
full cooperation and good citizenship.

     Robert Izenberg was not arrested.  Izenberg was not
charged with any crime.  His UUCP node -- full of some
140 megabytes of the files, mail, and data of himself and
his dozen or so entirely innocent users --  went out the
door
as "evidence."  Along with the disks and tapes, Izenberg
had lost about 800 megabytes of data.

     Six months would pass before Izenberg decided to
phone the Secret Service and ask how the case was going.
That was the first time that Robert Izenberg would ever
hear the name of William Cook.  As of January 1992, a full
two years after the seizure, Izenberg, still not charged
with
any crime, would be struggling through the morass of the
courts, in hope of recovering his thousands of dollars'
worth of seized equipment.

     In the meantime, the Izenberg case received
absolutely no press coverage.   The Secret Service had
walked into an Austin home, removed a UNIX bulletin-
board system, and met with no operational difficulties
whatsoever.

     Except that word of a crackdown had percolated
through the Legion of Doom.   "The Mentor" voluntarily
shut down "The Phoenix Project."  It seemed a pity,
especially as telco security employees had, in fact, shown
up on Phoenix, just as he had hoped -- along with the usual
motley crowd of LoD heavies, hangers-on, phreaks,
hackers and wannabes.  There was "Sandy" Sandquist
from US SPRINT security, and some guy named Henry
Kluepfel, from Bellcore itself!  Kluepfel had been trading
friendly banter with hackers on Phoenix since January
30th (two weeks after the Martin Luther King Day Crash).
The presence of such a stellar telco official seemed quite
the coup for Phoenix Project.

     Still, Mentor could judge the climate.  Atlanta in
ruins, *Phrack* in deep trouble, something weird going on
with UNIX nodes -- discretion was advisable.  Phoenix
Project went off-line.

     Kluepfel, of course, had been monitoring this LoD
bulletin board for his own purposes -- and those of the
Chicago unit.   As far back as June 1987, Kluepfel had
logged on to a Texas underground board called "Phreak
Klass 2600."  There he'd discovered an Chicago youngster
named "Shadowhawk," strutting and boasting about rifling
AT&T computer files, and bragging of his ambitions to
riddle AT&T's Bellcore computers with trojan horse
programs.  Kluepfel had passed the news to Cook in
Chicago, Shadowhawk's computers had gone out the door
in Secret Service custody, and Shadowhawk himself had
gone to jail.

     Now it was Phoenix Project's turn.   Phoenix Project
postured about "legality" and "merely intellectual
interest," but it reeked of the underground.  It had
*Phrack* on it.  It had the E911 Document.  It had a lot of
dicey talk about breaking into systems, including some
bold and reckless stuff about a supposed "decryption
service" that Mentor and friends were planning to run, to
help crack encrypted passwords off of hacked systems.

     Mentor was an adult.   There was a  bulletin board at
his place of work, as well.  Kleupfel logged onto this
board,
too, and discovered it to be called "Illuminati."  It was
run
by some company called Steve Jackson Games.

     On  March 1, 1990, the Austin crackdown went into
high gear.

     On the morning of March 1 -- a Thursday -- 21-year-
old University of Texas student "Erik Bloodaxe," co-sysop
of Phoenix Project and an avowed member of the Legion
of Doom, was wakened by a police revolver levelled at his
head.

     Bloodaxe watched, jittery, as Secret Service agents
appropriated his 300 baud terminal and, rifling his files,
discovered his treasured source-code for Robert Morris's
notorious Internet Worm.  But Bloodaxe, a wily operator,
had suspected that something of the like might be
coming.  All his best equipment had been hidden away
elsewhere.  The raiders took everything electronic,
however, including his telephone.  They were stymied by
his hefty arcade-style Pac-Man game, and left it in place,
as it was simply too heavy to move.

     Bloodaxe was not arrested.   He was not charged with
any crime.  A good two years later, the police still had
what
they had taken from him, however.

     The Mentor was less wary.  The dawn raid rousted
him and his wife from bed in their underwear, and six
Secret Service agents, accompanied by an Austin
policeman and  Henry Kluepfel himself, made a rich haul.
Off went the works, into the agents' white Chevrolet
minivan:  an IBM PC-AT clone with 4 meg of RAM and a
120-meg hard disk; a Hewlett-Packard LaserJet II printer;
a completely legitimate and highly expensive SCO-Xenix
286 operating system; Pagemaker disks and
documentation; and the Microsoft Word word-processing
program.  Mentor's wife had her incomplete academic
thesis stored on the hard-disk; that went, too, and so did
the couple's telephone.  As of two years later, all this
property remained in police custody.

     Mentor remained under guard in his apartment as
agents prepared to raid Steve Jackson Games.  The fact
that this was a business headquarters and not a private
residence did not deter the agents.  It was still very
early;
no one was at work yet.  The agents prepared to break
down the door, but Mentor, eavesdropping on the Secret
Service walkie-talkie traffic, begged them not to do it, and
offered his key to the building.

     The exact details of the next events are unclear.  The
agents would not let anyone else into the building.  Their
search warrant, when produced, was unsigned.
Apparently they breakfasted from the local
"Whataburger," as the litter from hamburgers was later
found inside.  They also extensively sampled a bag of
jellybeans kept by an SJG employee.  Someone tore a
"Dukakis for President" sticker from the wall.

     SJG employees, diligently showing up for the day's
work, were met at the door and briefly questioned by U.S.
Secret Service agents.  The employees watched in
astonishment as agents wielding crowbars and
screwdrivers emerged with captive machines.  They
attacked outdoor storage units with boltcutters.  The
agents wore blue nylon windbreakers with "SECRET
SERVICE" stencilled across the back, with running-shoes
and jeans.

     Jackson's company lost three computers, several
hard-disks, hundred of floppy disks, two monitors, three
modems, a laser printer, various powercords, cables, and
adapters (and, oddly, a small bag of screws, bolts and
nuts).   The seizure of Illuminati BBS deprived SJG of all
the programs, text files, and private e-mail on the board.
The loss of two other SJG computers was a severe blow as
well, since it caused the loss of electronically stored
contracts, financial projections, address directories,
mailing lists, personnel files, business correspondence,
and, not least, the drafts of forthcoming games and
gaming books.

     No one at Steve Jackson Games was arrested.  No
one was accused of any crime.   No charges were filed.
Everything appropriated was officially kept as "evidence"
of crimes never specified.

     After the *Phrack* show-trial, the Steve Jackson
Games scandal was the most bizarre and aggravating
incident of the Hacker Crackdown of 1990.   This raid by
the Chicago Task Force on a science-fiction gaming
publisher was to rouse a swarming host of civil liberties
issues, and gave rise to an enduring controversy that was
still re-complicating itself, and growing in the scope of
its
implications, a full two years later.

     The pursuit of the E911 Document stopped with the
Steve Jackson Games raid.   As we have seen, there were
hundreds, perhaps thousands of computer users in
America with the E911 Document in their possession.
Theoretically, Chicago had a perfect legal right to raid any
of these people, and could have legally seized the
machines of anybody who subscribed to *Phrack.*
However, there was no copy of the E911 Document on
Jackson's Illuminati board.   And there the Chicago raiders
stopped dead; they have not raided anyone since.

     It might be assumed that Rich Andrews and Charlie
Boykin, who had brought the E911 Document to the
attention of telco security, might be spared any official
suspicion.  B