t
Mitch Kapor.  He may not have the hard-riding, hell-for-
leather, guitar-strumming charisma of his Wyoming
colleague John Perry Barlow, but there's something about
the guy that still stops one short.   He has the air of the
Eastern city dude in the bowler hat, the dreamy,
Longfellow-quoting poker shark who only *happens*  to
know the exact mathematical odds against drawing to an
inside straight.  Even among his computer-community
colleagues, who are hardly known for mental sluggishness,
Kapor strikes one forcefully as a very intelligent man.  He
speaks rapidly, with vigorous gestures, his Boston accent
sometimes slipping to the sharp nasal tang of his youth in
Long Island.

     Kapor, whose Kapor Family Foundation does much
of his philanthropic work, is a strong supporter of Boston's
Computer Museum.   Kapor's interest in the history of his
industry has brought him some remarkable curios, such
as the "byte" just outside his office door.  This "byte"  --
eight digital bits -- has been salvaged from the wreck of an
electronic computer of the pre-transistor age.  It's a
standing gunmetal rack about the size of a small toaster-
oven:  with eight slots of hand-soldered breadboarding
featuring thumb-sized vacuum tubes.  If it fell off a table
it
could easily break your foot, but it was state-of-the-art
computation in the 1940s.   (It would take exactly 157,184
of
these primordial toasters to hold the first part of this
book.)

     There's also a coiling, multicolored, scaly dragon that
some inspired techno-punk artist has cobbled up entirely
out of transistors, capacitors, and brightly plastic-coated
wiring.

     Inside the office, Kapor excuses himself briefly to do
a little mouse-whizzing housekeeping on his personal
Macintosh IIfx.  If its giant  screen were an open window,
an agile person could climb through it without much
trouble at all.  There's a coffee-cup at Kapor's elbow, a
memento of his recent trip to Eastern Europe, which has a
black-and-white stencilled photo and the legend
CAPITALIST FOOLS TOUR.   It's Kapor, Barlow, and two
California venture-capitalist luminaries of their
acquaintance, four windblown, grinning Baby Boomer
dudes in leather jackets, boots, denim, travel bags,
standing on airport tarmac somewhere behind the
formerly Iron Curtain.  They look as if they're having the
absolute time of their lives.

     Kapor is in a reminiscent mood.  We talk a bit about
his youth -- high school days as a "math nerd,"  Saturdays
attending Columbia University's high-school science
honors program, where he had his first experience
programming computers.  IBM 1620s, in 1965 and '66.   "I
was very interested," says Kapor, "and then I went off to
college and got distracted by drugs sex and rock and roll,
like anybody with half a brain would have then!"  After
college he was a progressive-rock DJ in Hartford,
Connecticut, for a couple of years.

     I ask him if he ever misses his rock and roll days --
if
he ever wished he could go back to radio work.

     He shakes his head flatly.  "I stopped thinking about
going back to be a DJ the day after Altamont."

     Kapor moved to Boston in 1974 and got a job
programming mainframes in COBOL.  He hated it.  He
quit and became a teacher of transcendental meditation.
(It was Kapor's long flirtation with Eastern mysticism that
gave the world "Lotus.")

     In 1976 Kapor went to Switzerland, where the
Transcendental Meditation movement had rented a
gigantic Victorian hotel in St-Moritz.  It was an all-male
group -- a hundred and twenty of them -- determined
upon Enlightenment or Bust.   Kapor had given the
transcendant his best shot.  He was becoming
disenchanted by "the nuttiness in the organization."  "They
were teaching people to levitate," he says, staring at the
floor.  His voice drops an octave, becomes flat.  "*They
don't levitate.*"

      Kapor chose Bust.  He went back to the States and
acquired a degree in counselling psychology.  He worked a
while in a hospital, couldn't stand that either.  "My rep
was," he says  "a very bright kid with a lot of potential
who
hasn't found himself.  Almost thirty.  Sort of lost."

     Kapor was unemployed when he bought his first
personal computer -- an Apple II.  He sold his stereo to
raise cash and drove to New Hampshire to avoid the sales
tax.

     "The day after I purchased it," Kapor tells me,  "I was
hanging out in a computer store and I saw another guy, a
man in his forties, well-dressed guy, and eavesdropped on
his conversation with the salesman.  He didn't know
anything  about computers.  I'd had a year programming.
And I could program in BASIC.  I'd taught myself.  So I
went up to him, and I actually sold myself to him as a
consultant."  He pauses.  "I don't know where I got the
nerve to do this.  It was uncharacteristic.  I just said, 'I
think
I can help you, I've been listening, this is what you need
to
do and I think I can do it for you.'  And he took me on!  He
was my first client!  I became a computer consultant the
first day after I bought the Apple II."

     Kapor had found his true vocation.  He attracted
more clients for his consultant service, and started an
Apple users' group.

     A friend of Kapor's, Eric Rosenfeld, a graduate
student at MIT, had a problem.  He was doing a thesis on
an arcane form of financial statistics, but could not wedge
himself into the crowded queue for time on MIT's
mainframes.  (One might note at this point that if Mr.
Rosenfeld had dishonestly broken into the MIT
mainframes, Kapor himself might have never invented
Lotus 1-2-3 and the PC business might have been set back
for years!)   Eric Rosenfeld did have an Apple II, however,
and he thought it might be possible to scale the problem
down.  Kapor, as favor, wrote a program for him in BASIC
that did the job.

     It then occurred to the two of them, out of the blue,
that it might be possible to *sell*  this program.  They
marketed it themselves, in plastic baggies, for about a
hundred bucks a pop, mail order.    "This was a total
cottage industry by a marginal consultant," Kapor says
proudly.  "That's how I got started, honest to God."

     Rosenfeld, who later became a very prominent figure
on Wall Street, urged Kapor to go to MIT's business
school for an MBA.   Kapor  did seven months there, but
never got his MBA.  He picked up some useful tools --
mainly a firm grasp of the principles of accounting -- and,
in his own words, "learned to talk MBA."   Then he
dropped out and went to Silicon Valley.

     The inventors of VisiCalc, the Apple computer's
premier business program, had shown an interest in
Mitch Kapor.   Kapor worked diligently for them for six
months, got tired of California, and went back to Boston
where they had better bookstores.   The VisiCalc group
had made the critical error of bringing in "professional
management."  "That drove them into the ground," Kapor
says.

     "Yeah, you don't hear a lot about VisiCalc these days,"
I muse.

     Kapor looks surprised.  "Well, Lotus.... we *bought*
it."

     "Oh.  You *bought*  it?"

     "Yeah."

     "Sort of like the Bell System buying Western Union?"

     Kapor grins.  "Yep!  Yep!  Yeah, exactly!"

     Mitch Kapor was not in full command of the destiny
of himself or his industry.  The hottest software
commodities of the early 1980s were *computer games*  --
the Atari seemed destined to enter every teenage home in
America.  Kapor got into business software simply
because he didn't have any particular feeling for
computer games.  But he was supremely fast on his feet,
open to new ideas and inclined to trust his instincts.   And
his instincts were good.  He chose good people to deal with
-- gifted programmer Jonathan Sachs (the co-author of
Lotus 1-2-3).   Financial wizard Eric Rosenfeld, canny Wall
Street analyst and venture capitalist Ben Rosen.  Kapor
was the founder and CEO of Lotus, one of the most
spectacularly successful business ventures of the later
twentieth century.

     He is now an extremely wealthy man.  I ask him if he
actually knows how much money he has.

     "Yeah," he says.  "Within a percent or two."

     How much does he actually have, then?

     He shakes his head.  "A lot.  A lot.  Not something I
talk about.  Issues of money and class are  things that cut
pretty close to the bone."

     I don't pry.  It's beside the point.  One might
presume, impolitely, that Kapor has at least forty million -
-
that's what he got the year he left Lotus.  People who ought
to know claim Kapor has about a hundred and fifty
million, give or take a market swing in his stock holdings.
If Kapor had stuck with Lotus, as his colleague friend and
rival Bill Gates has stuck with his own software start-up,
Microsoft, then Kapor would likely have much the same
fortune Gates has -- somewhere in the neighborhood of
three billion, give or take a few hundred million.   Mitch
Kapor has all the money he wants.  Money has lost
whatever charm it ever held for him -- probably not much
in the first place.    When Lotus became too uptight, too
bureaucratic, too far from the true sources of his own
satisfaction, Kapor walked.   He simply severed all
connections with the company and went out the door.  It
stunned everyone -- except those who knew him best.

     Kapor has not had to strain his resources to wreak a
thorough transformation in cyberspace politics.  In its
first
year, EFF's budget was about a quarter of a million dollars.
Kapor is running EFF out of his pocket change.

     Kapor takes pains to tell me that he does not
consider himself a civil libertarian per se.  He has spent
quite some time with true-blue civil libertarians lately,
and
there's a political-correctness to them that bugs him.  They
seem to him to spend entirely too much time in legal
nitpicking and not enough vigorously exercising civil
rights in the everyday real world.

      Kapor is an entrepreneur.  Like all hackers, he
prefers his involvements  direct, personal, and hands-on.
"The fact that EFF has a node on the Internet is a great
thing.  We're a publisher.  We're a distributor of
information."  Among the items the eff.org Internet node
carries is back issues of *Phrack.*  They had an internal
debate about that in EFF, and finally decided to take the
plunge.  They might carry other digital underground
publications -- but if they do, he says, "we'll certainly
carry
Donn Parker, and anything Gail Thackeray wants to put
up.  We'll turn it into a public library, that has the whole
spectrum of use.  Evolve in the direction of people making
up their own minds."  He grins.  "We'll try to label all the
editorials."

     Kapor is determined to tackle the technicalities of
the Internet in the service of the public interest.   "The
problem with being a node on the Net today is that you've
got to have a captive technical specialist.  We have Chris
Davis around, for the care and feeding of the balky beast!
We couldn't do it ourselves!"

     He pauses.  "So one direction in which technology has
to evolve is much more standardized units, that a non-
technical person can feel comfortable with.  It's the same
shift as from minicomputers to PCs.  I can see a future in
which any person can have a Node on the Net.  Any
person can be a publisher.  It's better than the media we
now have.  It's possible.  We're working actively."

     Kapor is in his element now, fluent, thoroughly in
command in his material.   "You go tell a hardware
Internet hacker that everyone should have a node on the
Net," he says, "and the first thing they're going to say is,
'IP
doesn't scale!'"  ("IP" is the interface protocol for the
Internet.  As it currently exists, the IP software is simply
not capable of indefinite expansion; it will run out of
usable addresses, it will saturate.)   "The answer," Kapor
says,  "is:  evolve the protocol!  Get the smart people
together and figure out what to do.  Do we add ID?  Do we
add new protocol?  Don't just say, *we can't do it.*"

     Getting smart people together to figure out what to
do is a skill at which Kapor clearly excels.   I counter
that
people on the Internet rather enjoy their elite technical
status, and don't seem particularly anxious to democratize
the Net.

     Kapor agrees, with a show of scorn.  "I tell them that
this is the snobbery of the people on the *Mayflower*
looking down their noses at the people who came over *on
the second boat!*   Just because they got here a year, or
five years, or ten years before everybody else, that doesn't
give them ownership of cyberspace!  By what right?"

     I remark that the telcos are an electronic network,
too, and they seem to guard their specialized knowledge
pretty closely.

     Kapor ripostes that the telcos and the Internet are
entirely different animals.  "The Internet is an open
system, everything is published, everything gets argued
about, basically by anybody who can get in.  Mostly, it's
exclusive and elitist just because it's so difficult.  Let's
make it easier to use."

     On the other hand, he allows with a swift change of
emphasis, the so-called elitists do have a point as well.
"Before people start coming in, who are new, who want to
make suggestions, and criticize the Net as 'all screwed
up'....  They should at least take the time to understand
the
culture on its own terms.  It has its own history -- show
some respect for it.  I'm a conservative, to that extent."

     The Internet is Kapor's paradigm for the future of
telecommunications.  The Internet is decentralized, non-
heirarchical, almost anarchic.  There are no bosses, no
chain of command, no secret data.  If each node obeys the
general interface standards, there's simply no need for
any central network authority.

     Wouldn't that spell the doom of AT&T as an
institution?  I ask.

     That prospect doesn't faze Kapor for a moment.
"Their  big advantage, that they have now, is that they have
all of the wiring.  But two things are happening.  Anyone
with right-of-way is putting down fiber -- Southern Pacific
Railroad, people like that -- there's enormous 'dark fiber'
laid in."  ("Dark Fiber" is fiber-optic cable, whose
enormous capacity so exceeds the demands of current
usage that much of the fiber still has no light-signals on
it -
- it's still 'dark,' awaiting future use.)

     "The other thing that's happening is the local-loop
stuff is going to go wireless.  Everyone from Bellcore to
the
cable TV companies to AT&T wants to put in these things
called 'personal communication systems.'  So you could
have local competition -- you could have multiplicity of
people, a bunch of neighborhoods, sticking stuff up on
poles.  And a bunch of other people laying in dark fiber.
So what happens to the telephone companies?  There's
enormous pressure on them from both sides.

     "The more I look at this, the more I believe that in a
post-industrial, digital world, the idea of regulated
monopolies is bad.  People will look back on it and say that
in the 19th and 20th centuries the idea of public utilities
was an okay compromise.  You needed one set of wires in
the ground.  It was too economically inefficient, otherwise.
And that meant one entity running it.  But now, with pieces
being wireless -- the connections are going to be via high-
level interfaces, not via wires.  I mean, *ultimately*
there
are going to be wires -- but the wires are just a commodity.
Fiber, wireless.  You no longer *need*  a utility."

     Water utilities?  Gas utilities?

     Of course we still need those, he agrees.   "But when
what you're moving is information, instead of physical
substances, then you can play by a different set of rules.
We're evolving those rules now!   Hopefully you can have
a much more decentralized system, and one in which
there's more competition in the marketplace.

     "The role of government will be to make sure that
nobody cheats.  The proverbial 'level playing field.'   A
policy that prevents monopolization.  It should result in
better service, lower prices, more choices, and local
empowerment."  He smiles.  "I'm very big on local
empowerment."

     Kapor is a man with a vision.  It's a very novel vision
which he and his allies are working out in considerable
detail and with great energy.  Dark, cynical, morbid
cyberpunk that I am, I cannot avoid considering some of
the darker implications of "decentralized, nonhierarchical,
locally empowered" networking.

     I remark that some pundits have suggested that
electronic networking -- faxes, phones, small-scale
photocopiers -- played a strong role in dissolving the
power of centralized communism and causing the
collapse of the Warsaw Pact.

     Socialism is totally discredited, says Kapor, fresh
back from the Eastern Bloc.  The idea that faxes did it, all
by themselves, is rather wishful thinking.

     Has it occurred to him that electronic networking
might corrode America's industrial and political
infrastructure to the point where the whole thing becomes
untenable, unworkable -- and the old order just collapses
headlong, like in Eastern Europe?

     "No," Kapor says flatly.  "I think that's
extraordinarily
unlikely.  In part, because ten or fifteen years ago, I had
similar hopes about personal computers -- which utterly
failed to materialize." He grins wryly, then his eyes
narrow.
"I'm *very* opposed to techno-utopias.  Every time I see
one, I either run away, or try to kill it."

     It dawns on me then that Mitch Kapor is not trying to
make the world safe for democracy.  He certainly is not
trying to make it safe for anarchists or utopians -- least
of
all for computer intruders or electronic rip-off artists.
What he really hopes to do is make the world safe for
future Mitch Kapors.  This world of decentralized, small-
scale nodes, with instant global access for the best and
brightest, would be a perfect milieu for the shoestring
attic
capitalism that made Mitch Kapor what he is today.

     Kapor is a very bright man.  He has a rare
combination of visionary intensity with a strong practical
streak.  The Board of the EFF:  John Barlow, Jerry Berman
of the ACLU, Stewart Brand, John Gilmore, Steve
Wozniak, and Esther Dyson, the doyenne of East-West
computer entrepreneurism -- share his gift, his vision, and
his formidable networking talents.   They are people of the
1960s,  winnowed-out by its turbulence and rewarded with
wealth and influence.   They are some of the best and the
brightest that the electronic community has to offer.  But
can they do it, in the real world?  Or are they only
dreaming?   They are so few.  And there is so much against
them.

     I leave Kapor and his networking employees
struggling cheerfully with the promising intricacies of
their
newly installed Macintosh System 7 software.  The next
day is Saturday.  EFF is closed.  I pay a few visits to
points
of interest downtown.

     One of them is the birthplace of the telephone.

     It's marked by a bronze plaque in a plinth of black-
and-white speckled granite.  It sits in the plaza of the
John
F. Kennedy Federal Building, the very place where Kapor
was once fingerprinted by the FBI.

     The plaque has a bas-relief picture of Bell's original
telephone.  "BIRTHPLACE OF THE TELEPHONE," it
reads.  "Here, on June 2, 1875, Alexander Graham Bell and
Thomas A. Watson first transmitted sound over wires.

     "This successful experiment was completed in a fifth
floor garret at what was then 109 Court Street and marked
the beginning of world-wide telephone service."

     109 Court Street is long gone.  Within sight of Bell's
plaque, across a street, is one of the central offices of
NYNEX, the local  Bell RBOC, on 6 Bowdoin Square.

     I cross the street and circle the telco building,
slowly,
hands in my jacket pockets.  It's a bright, windy, New
England autumn day.   The central office is a handsome
1940s-era megalith in late Art Deco, eight stories high.

     Parked outside the back is a power-generation truck.
The generator strikes me as rather anomalous.  Don't they
already have their own generators in this eight-story
monster?  Then the suspicion strikes me that NYNEX
must have heard of the September 17 AT&T power-outage
which crashed New York City.  Belt-and-suspenders, this
generator.  Very telco.

     Over the glass doors of the front entrance is a
handsome bronze bas-relief of Art Deco vines, sunflowers,
and birds, entwining the Bell logo and the legend NEW
ENGLAND TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANY
-- an entity which no longer officially exists.

     The doors are locked securely.  I peer through the
shadowed glass.  Inside is an official poster reading:

     "New England Telephone a NYNEX Company

               ATTENTION

     "All persons while on New England Telephone
Company premises are required to visibly wear their
identification cards (C.C.P. Section 2, Page 1).

     "Visitors, vendors, contractors, and all others are
required to visibly wear a daily pass.
                    "Thank you.
                    Kevin C. Stanton.
                    Building Security Coordinator."

     Outside, around the corner, is a pull-down ribbed
metal security door, a locked delivery entrance.  Some
passing stranger has grafitti-tagged this door, with a
single
word in red spray-painted cursive:

               *Fury*

                    #

     My book on the Hacker Crackdown is almost over
now.  I have deliberately saved the best for last.

     In February 1991, I attended the CPSR Public Policy
Roundtable, in Washington, DC.   CPSR, Computer
Professionals for Social Responsibility, was a sister
organization of EFF, or perhaps its aunt, being older and
perhaps somewhat wiser in the ways of the world of
politics.

     Computer Professionals for  Social Responsibility
began in 1981 in Palo Alto, as an informal discussion group
of Californian computer scientists and technicians, united
by nothing more than an electronic mailing list.   This
typical high-tech ad-hocracy received the dignity of its
own acronym in 1982, and was formally incorporated in
1983.

     CPSR lobbied government and public alike with an
educational outreach effort, sternly warning against any
foolish and unthinking trust in complex computer
systems.  CPSR insisted that mere computers should
never be considered a magic panacea for humanity's
social, ethical or political problems.  CPSR members were
especially troubled about the stability, safety, and
dependability of military computer systems, and very
especially troubled by those systems controlling nuclear
arsenals.  CPSR was best-known for its persistent and well-
publicized attacks on the scientific credibility of the
Strategic Defense Initiative ("Star Wars").

     In 1990, CPSR was the nation's veteran cyber-political
activist group, with over two thousand members in twenty-
one local chapters across the US.  It was especially active
in Boston, Silicon Valley, and Washington DC, where its
Washington office sponsored the Public Policy
Roundtable.

     The Roundtable, however, had been funded by EFF,
which had passed CPSR an extensive grant for operations.
This was the first large-scale, official meeting of what was
to become the electronic civil libertarian community.

     Sixty people attended, myself included -- in this
instance, not so much as a journalist as a cyberpunk
author.   Many of the luminaries of the field took part:
Kapor and Godwin as a matter of course.  Richard Civille
and Marc Rotenberg of CPSR.  Jerry Berman of the ACLU.
John Quarterman, author of *The Matrix.*  Steven Levy,
author of *Hackers.*   George Perry and Sandy Weiss of
Prodigy Services, there to network about the civil-liberties
troubles their young commercial network was
experiencing.  Dr. Dorothy Denning.  Cliff Figallo,
manager of the Well.  Steve Jackson was there, having
finally found his ideal target audience, and so was Craig
Neidorf, "Knight Lightning" himself, with his attorney,
Sheldon Zenner.  Katie Hafner, science journalist, and co-
author of *Cyberpunk:  Outlaws and Hackers on the
Computer Frontier.*  Dave Farber, ARPAnet pioneer and
fabled Internet guru.  Janlori Goldman of the ACLU's
Project on Privacy and Technology.  John Nagle of
Autodesk and the Well.  Don Goldberg of the House
Judiciary Committee.  Tom Guidoboni, the defense
attorney in the Internet Worm case.  Lance Hoffman,
computer-science professor at The George Washington
University.  Eli Noam of Columbia.  And a host of others
no less distinguished.

     Senator Patrick Leahy delivered the keynote address,
expressing his determination to keep ahead of the curve
on the issue of electronic free speech.  The address was
well-received, and the sense of excitement was palpable.
Every panel discussion was interesting -- some were
entirely compelling.  People networked with an almost
frantic interest.

     I myself had a most interesting and cordial lunch
discussion with Noel and Jeanne Gayler, Admiral Gayler
being a former director of the National Security Agency.
As this was the first known encounter between an actual
no-kidding cyberpunk and a chief executive of America's
largest and best-financed electronic espionage apparat,
there was naturally a bit of eyebrow-raising on both sides.

     Unfortunately, our discussion was off-the-record.  In
fact all  the discussions at the CPSR were officially off-
the-
record, the idea being to do some serious networking in an
atmosphere of complete frankness, rather than to stage a
media circus.

     In any case, CPSR Roundtable, though interesting
and intensely valuable, was as nothing compared to the
truly mind-boggling event that transpired a mere month
later.

                         #

     "Computers, Freedom and Privacy."  Four hundred
people from every conceivable corner of America's
electronic community.  As a science fiction writer, I have
been to some weird gigs in my day, but this thing is truly
*beyond the pale.*   Even "Cyberthon," Point Foundation's
"Woodstock of Cyberspace" where Bay Area psychedelia
collided headlong with the emergent world of
computerized virtual reality, was like a Kiwanis Club gig
compared to this astonishing do.

     The "electronic community" had reached an apogee.
Almost every principal in this book is in attendance.  Civil
Libertarians.  Computer Cops.  The Digital Underground.
Even a few discreet telco people.   Colorcoded dots for
lapel tags are distributed.  Free Expression issues.  Law
Enforcement.  Computer Security.  Privacy.  Journalists.
Lawyers.  Educators.  Librarians.  Programmers.  Stylish
punk-black dots for the hackers and phone phreaks.
Almost everyone here seems to wear eight or nine dots, to
have six or seven professional hats.

     It is a community.  Something like Lebanon perhaps,
but a digital nation. People who had feuded all year in the
national press, people who entertained the deepest
suspicions of one another's motives and ethics, are now in
each others' laps.   "Computers, Freedom and Privacy"
had every reason in the world to turn ugly, and yet except
for small irruptions of puzzling nonsense from the
convention's token lunatic, a surprising bonhomie
reigned.  CFP was like a wedding-party in which two lovers,
unstable bride and charlatan groom, tie the knot in a
clearly disastrous matrimony.

     It is clear to both families -- even to neighbors and
random guests -- that this is not a workable relationship,
and yet the young couple's desperate attraction can brook
no further delay.   They simply cannot help themselves.
Crockery will fly, shrieks from their newlywed home will
wake the city block, divorce waits in the wings like a
vulture over the Kalahari, and yet this is a wedding, and
there is going to be a child from it.  Tragedies end in
death;
comedies in marriage.  The Hacker Crackdown is ending
in marriage.  And there will be a child.

     From the beginning, anomalies reign.  John Perry
Barlow, cyberspace ranger, is here.  His color photo in
*The New York Times Magazine,* Barlow scowling in a
grim Wyoming snowscape, with long black coat, dark hat,
a Macintosh SE30 propped on a fencepost and an
awesome frontier rifle tucked under one arm,  will be the
single most striking visual image of the Hacker
Crackdown.   And he is CFP's guest of honor -- along with
Gail Thackeray of the FCIC!   What on earth do they
expect these dual guests to do with each other?  Waltz?

     Barlow delivers the first address.
Uncharacteristically, he is hoarse -- the sheer volume of
roadwork has worn him down.  He speaks briefly,
congenially, in a plea for conciliation, and takes his leave
to a storm of applause.

     Then Gail Thackeray takes the stage.  She's visibly
nervous.  She's been on the Well a lot lately.  Reading
those Barlow posts.   Following Barlow is a challenge to
anyone.  In honor of the famous lyricist for the Grateful
Dead, she announces reedily, she is going to read -- *a
poem.*  A poem she has composed herself.

     It's an awful poem, doggerel in the rollicking meter of
Robert W. Service's *The Cremation of Sam McGee,*  but
it is in fact, a poem.  It's the *Ballad of the Electronic
Frontier!*  A poem about the Hacker Crackdown and the
sheer unlikelihood of CFP.   It's full of in-jokes.  The
score
or so cops in the audience, who are sitting together in a
nervous claque, are absolutely cracking-up.  Gail's poem is
the funniest goddamn thing they've ever heard.  The
hackers and civil-libs, who had this woman figured for Ilsa
She-Wolf of the SS, are staring with their jaws hanging
loosely.  Never in the wildest reaches of their imagination
had they figured Gail Thackeray was capable of such a
totally off-the-wall move.  You can see them punching
their mental CONTROL-RESET buttons.   Jesus!  This
woman's a hacker weirdo!  She's  *just like us!*    God,
this
changes everything!

       Al Bayse, computer technician for the FBI, had been
the only cop at the CPSR Roundtable, dragged there with
his arm bent by Dorothy Denning.  He was guarded and
tightlipped at CPSR Roundtable; a "lion thrown to the
Christians."

     At CFP, backed by a claque of cops, Bayse suddenly
waxes eloquent and even droll, describing the FBI's
"NCIC 2000", a gigantic digital catalog of criminal records,
as if he has suddenly become some weird hybrid of
George Orwell and George Gobel.   Tentatively, he makes
an arcane joke about statistical analysis.  At least a third
of
the crowd laughs aloud.

     "They didn't laugh at that at my last speech,"  Bayse
observes.  He had been addressing cops -- *straight*  cops,
not computer people.  It had been a worthy meeting,
useful one supposes, but nothing like *this.*  There has
never been *anything*  like this.  Without any prodding,
without any preparation, people in the audience simply
begin to ask questions.  Longhairs, freaky people,
mathematicians.  Bayse is answering, politely, frankly,
fully, like a man walking on air.  The ballroom's
atmosphere crackles with surreality.   A female lawyer
behind me breaks into a sweat and a hot waft of
surprisingly potent and musky perfume flows off her
pulse-points.

     People are giddy with laughter.  People are
interested, fascinated, their eyes so wide and dark that
they seem eroticized.  Unlikely daisy-chains form in the
halls, around the bar, on the escalators:  cops with
hackers,
civil rights with FBI, Secret Service with phone phreaks.

     Gail Thackeray is at her crispest in a white wool
sweater with a tiny Secret Service logo.  "I found Phiber
Optik at the payphones, and when he saw my sweater, he
turned into a *pillar of salt!*" she chortles.

     Phiber discusses his case at much length with his
arresting officer, Don Delaney of the New York State
Police.  After an hour's chat, the two of them look ready to
begin singing "Auld Lang Syne."  Phiber finally finds the
courage to get his worst complaint off his chest.  It isn't
so
much the arrest.  It was the *charge.*  Pirating service off
900 numbers.  I'm a *programmer,* Phiber insists.  This
lame charge is going to hurt my reputation.  It would have
been cool to be busted for something happening, like
Section 1030 computer intrusion.  Maybe some kind of
crime that's scarcely been invented yet.  Not lousy phone
fraud.  Phooey.

     Delaney seems regretful.  He had a mountain of
possible criminal charges against Phiber Optik.  The kid's
gonna plead guilty anyway.  He's a first timer, they always
plead.  Coulda charged the kid with most anything, and
gotten the same result in the end.  Delaney seems
genuinely sorry not to have gratified Phiber in this
harmless fashion.  Too late now.  Phiber's pled already.
All
water under the bridge.  Whaddya gonna do?

     Delaney's got a good grasp on the hacker mentality.
He held a press conference after he busted a bunch of
Masters of Deception kids.  Some journo had asked him:
"Would you describe these people as *geniuses?*"
Delaney's deadpan answer, perfect:  "No, I would describe
these people as *defendants.*"   Delaney busts a kid for
hacking codes with repeated random dialling.  Tells the
press that NYNEX can track this stuff in no time flat
nowadays, and a kid has to be *stupid*  to do something so
easy to catch.   Dead on again:  hackers don't mind being
thought of as Genghis Khan by the straights,  but if there's
anything that really gets 'em where they live, it's being
called *dumb.*

     Won't be as much fun for Phiber next time around.
As a second offender he's gonna see prison.   Hackers
break the law.  They're not geniuses, either.  They're gonna
be defendants.  And yet, Delaney muses over a drink in
the hotel bar, he has found it impossible to treat them as
common criminals.   Delaney knows criminals.  These
kids, by comparison, are clueless -- there is just no crook
vibe off of them, they don't smell right, they're just not
*bad.*

     Delaney has seen a lot of action.  He did Vietnam.
He's been shot at, he has shot people.  He's a homicide
cop from New York.  He has the appearance of a man who
has not only seen the shit hit the fan but has seen it
splattered across whole city blocks and left to ferment for
years.  This guy has been around.

     He listens to Steve Jackson tell his story.  The dreamy
game strategist has been dealt a bad hand.  He has played
it for all he is worth.  Under his nerdish SF-fan exterior
is a
core of iron.   Friends of his say Steve Jackson believes in
the rules, believes in fair play.  He will never compromise
his principles, never give up.  "Steve," Delaney says to
Steve Jackson, "they had some balls, whoever busted you.
You're all right!"   Jackson, stunned, falls silent and
actually
blushes with pleasure.

     Neidorf has grown up a lot in the past year.  The kid
is
a quick study, you gotta give him that.   Dressed by his
mom, the fashion manager for a national clothing chain,
Missouri college techie-frat Craig Neidorf out-dappers
everyone at this gig but the toniest East Coast lawyers.
The iron jaws of prison clanged shut without him and now
law school beckons for Neidorf.  He looks like a larval
Congressman.

     Not a "hacker," our Mr. Neidorf.  He's not interested
in computer science.  Why should he be?  He's not
interested in writing C code the rest of his life, and
besides,
he's seen where the chips fall.  To the world of computer
science he and *Phrack*  were just a curiosity.  But to the
world of law....  The kid has learned where the bodies are
buried.  He carries his notebook of press clippings
wherever he goes.

     Phiber Optik makes fun of Neidorf for a Midwestern
geek, for believing that "Acid Phreak" does acid and
listens to acid rock.  Hell no.  Acid's never done *acid!*
Acid's into *acid house music.*  Jesus.  The very idea of
doing LSD.  Our *parents*  did LSD, ya clown.

       Thackeray suddenly turns upon Craig Neidorf the
full lighthouse glare of her attention and begins a
determined half-hour attempt to *win the boy over.*  The
Joan of Arc of Computer Crime is *giving career advice to
Knight Lightning!*   "Your experience would be very
valuable -- a real asset," she tells him with unmistakeable
sixty-thousand-watt sincerity.  Neidorf is fascinated.  He
listens with unfeigned attention.  He's nodding and saying
yes ma'am.  Yes, Craig, you too can forget all about money
and enter the glamorous and horribly underpaid world of
PROSECUTING COMPUTER CRIME!  You can put your
former friends in prison -- ooops....

     You cannot go on dueling at modem's length
indefinitely.   You cannot beat one another senseless with
rolled-up press-clippings.  Sooner or later you have to
come directly to grips.  And yet the very act of assembling
here has changed the entire situation drastically.   John
Quarterman, author of *The Matrix,* explains the Internet
at his symposium.  It is the largest news network in the
world, it is growing by leaps and bounds, and yet you
cannot measure Internet because you cannot stop it in
place.  It cannot stop, because there is no one anywhere in
the world with the authority to stop Internet.  It changes,
yes, it grows, it embeds itself across the post-industrial,
postmodern world and it generates community wherever
it touches, and it is doing this all by itself.

     Phiber is different.  A very fin de siecle kid, Phiber
Optik.  Barlow says he looks like an Edwardian dandy.   He
does rather.  Shaven neck, the sides of his skull cropped
hip-hop close, unruly tangle of black hair on top that looks
pomaded, he stays up till four a.m.  and misses all the
sessions, then hangs out in payphone booths with his
acoustic coupler gutsily CRACKING SYSTEMS RIGHT IN
THE MIDST OF THE HEAVIEST LAW ENFORCEMENT
DUDES IN THE U.S., or at least *pretending* to....  Unlike
"Frank Drake."  Drake, who wrote Dorothy Denning out of
nowhere, and asked for an interview for his cheapo
cyberpunk fanzine, and then started grilling her on her
ethics.   She was squirmin', too....   Drake, scarecrow-tall
with his floppy blond mohawk, rotting tennis shoes and
black leather jacket lettered ILLUMINATI in red, gives off
an unmistakeable air of the bohemian literatus.  Drake is
the kind of guy who reads British industrial design
magazines and appreciates William Gibson because the
quality of the prose is so tasty.  Drake could never touch a
phone or a keyboard again, and he'd still have the nose-
ring and the blurry photocopied fanzines and the sampled
industrial music.  He's a radical punk with a desktop-
publishing rig and an Internet address.  Standing next to
Drake, the diminutive Phiber looks like he's been
physically coagulated out of phone-lines.  Born to phreak.

     Dorothy Denning approaches Phiber suddenly.  The
two of them are about the same height and body-build.
Denning's blue eyes flash behind the round window-
frames of her glasses.  "Why did you say I was 'quaint?'"
she asks Phiber, quaintly.

     It's a perfect description but Phiber is nonplussed...
"Well, I uh, you know...."

     "I also think you're quaint, Dorothy," I say, novelist
to
the rescue, the journo gift of gab...  She is neat and
dapper
and yet there's an arcane quality to her, something like a
Pilgrim Maiden behind leaded glass; if she were six inches
high Dorothy Denning would look great inside a china
cabinet...  The Cryptographeress....  The Cryptographrix...
whatever...   Weirdly, Peter Denning looks just like his
wife, you could pick this gentleman out of a thousand guys
as the soulmate of Dorothy Denning.  Wearing tailored
slacks, a spotless fuzzy varsity sweater, and a neatly
knotted academician's tie.... This fineboned, exquisitely
polite, utterly civilized and hyperintelligent couple seem
to have emerged from some cleaner and finer parallel
universe, where humanity exists to do the Brain Teasers
column in Scientific American.   Why does this Nice Lady
hang out with these unsavory characters?

     Because the time has come for it, that's why.
Because she's the best there is at what she does.

     Donn Parker is here, the Great Bald Eagle of
Computer Crime....  With his bald dome, great height, and
enormous Lincoln-like hands, the great visionary pioneer
of the field plows through the lesser mortals like an
icebreaker....  His eyes are fixed on the future with the
rigidity of a bronze statue....  Eventually, he tells his
audience, all business crime will be computer crime,
because businesses will do everything through computers.
"Computer crime" as a category will vanish.

     In the meantime,  passing fads will flourish and fail
and evaporate....  Parker's commanding, resonant voice is
sphinxlike, everything is viewed from some eldritch valley
of deep historical abstraction...  Yes, they've come and
they've gone, these passing flaps in the world of digital
computation....  The radio-frequency emanation scandal...
KGB and MI5 and CIA do it every day, it's easy, but
nobody else ever has....  The salami-slice fraud, mostly
mythical...  "Crimoids," he calls them....  Computer viruses
are the current crimoid champ, a lot less dangerous than
most people let on, but the novelty is fading and there's a
crimoid vacuum at the moment, the press is visibly
hungering for something more outrageous....  The Great
Man shares with us a few speculations on the coming
crimoids....  Desktop Forgery!  Wow....  Computers stolen
just for the sake of the information within them -- data-
napping!  Happened in Britain a while ago, could be the
coming thing....  Phantom nodes in the Internet!

     Parker handles his overhead projector sheets with an
ecclesiastical air...  He wears a grey double-breasted suit,
a
light blue shirt, and a very quiet tie of understated maroon
and blue paisley...  Aphorisms emerge from him with slow,
leaden emphasis...  There is no such thing as an
adequately secure computer when one faces a sufficiently
powerful adversary.... Deterrence is the most socially
useful aspect of security...  People are the primary
weakness in all information systems...  The entire baseline
of computer security must be shifted upward....  Don't ever
violate your security by publicly describing your security
measures...

     People in the audience are beginning to squirm, and
yet there is something about the elemental purity of this
guy's philosophy that compels uneasy respect....  Parker
sounds like the only sane guy left in the lifeboat,
sometimes.  The guy who can prove rigorously, from deep
moral principles, that Harvey there, the one with the
broken leg and the checkered past, is the one who has to
be, err.... that is, Mr. Harvey is best placed to make the
necessary sacrifice for the security and indeed the very
survival of the rest of this lifeboat's crew....   Computer
security, Parker informs us mournfully, is a nasty topic,
and we wish we didn't have to have  it...  The security
expert, armed with method and logic, must think --
imagine -- everything that the adversary might do before
the adversary might actually do it.   It is as if the
criminal's
dark brain were an extensive subprogram within the
shining cranium of Donn Parker.   He is a Holmes whose
Moriarty does not quite yet exist and so must be perfectly
simulated.

     CFP is a stellar gathering, with the giddiness of a
wedding.  It is a happy time, a happy ending, they know
their world is changing forever tonight, and they're proud
to have been there to see it happen, to talk, to think, to
help.

     And yet as night falls, a certain elegiac quality
manifests itself, as the crowd gathers beneath the
chandeliers with their wineglasses and dessert plates.
Something is ending here, gone forever, and it takes a
while to pinpoint it.

     It is the End of the Amateurs.

***********

Afterword:  The Hacker Crackdown Three Years Later

     Three years in cyberspace is like thirty years anyplace
real.  It feels as if a generation has passed since I wrote
this
book.  In terms of the generations of computing machinery
involved, that's pretty much the case.

     The basic shape of cyberspace has changed drastically
since 1990.  A new U.S. Administration is in power whose
personnel are, if anything, only too aware of the nature and
potential of electronic networks.  It's now clear to all
players
concerned that the status quo is dead-and-gone in American
media and telecommunications, and almost any territory on
the electronic frontier is up for grabs.  Interactive
multimedia,
cable-phone alliances, the Information Superhighway, fiber-
to-the-curb, laptops and palmtops, the explosive growth of
cellular and the Internet -- the earth trembles visibly.

     The year 1990 was not a pleasant one for AT&T.  By
1993,
however, AT&T had successfully devoured the computer
company NCR in an unfriendly takeover, finally giving the
pole-climbers a major piece of the digital action.  AT&T
managed to rid itself of ownership of the troublesome UNIX
operating system, selling it to Novell, a netware company,
which was itself preparing for a savage market dust-up with
operating-system titan Microsoft.  Furthermore, AT&T
acquired McCaw Cellular in a gigantic merger, giving AT&T a
potential wireless whip-hand over its former progeny, the
RBOCs.  The RBOCs themselves were now AT&T's clearest
potential rivals, as the Chinese firewalls between regulated
monopoly and frenzied digital entrepreneurism began to melt
and collapse headlong.

     AT&T, mocked by industry analysts in 1990, was reaping
awestruck praise by commentators in 1993.   AT&T had
managed to avoid any more major software crashes in its
switching stations.  AT&T's newfound reputation as "the
nimble giant" was all the sweeter, since AT&T's traditional
rival giant in the world of multinational computing, IBM,
was
almost prostrate by 1993.  IBM's vision of the commercial
computer-network of the future, "Prodigy," had managed to
spend $900 million without a whole heck of a lot to show for
it,
while AT&T, by contrast, was boldly speculating on the
possibilities of personal communicators and hedging its bets
with investments in handwritten interfaces.  In 1990 AT&T
had
looked bad; but in 1993 AT&T looked like the future.

     At least, AT&T's *advertising* looked like the future.
Similar public attention was riveted on the massive $22
billion
megamerger between RBOC Bell Atlantic and cable-TV giant
Tele-Communications Inc.   Nynex was buying into cable
company Viacom International.  BellSouth was buying stock in
Prime Management, Southwestern Bell acquiring a cable
company in Washington DC, and so forth.   By stark contrast,
the Internet, a noncommercial entity which officially did
not
even exist, had no advertising budget at all.  And yet,
almost
below the level of governmental and corporate awareness,
the
Internet was stealthily devouring everything in its path,
growing at a rate that defied comprehension.  Kids who might
have been eager computer-intruders a mere five years earlier
were now surfing the Internet, where their natural urge to
explore led them into cyberspace landscapes of such
mindboggling vastness that the very idea of hacking
passwords
seemed rather a waste of time.

     By 1993, there had not been a solid, knock 'em down,
panic-striking, teenage-hacker  computer-intrusion scandal
in
many long months.  There had, of course, been some striking
and well-publicized acts of illicit computer access, but
they had
been committed by adult white-collar industry insiders in
clear
pursuit of personal or commercial advantage.  The kids, by
contrast, all seemed to be on IRC, Internet Relay Chat.

     Or, perhaps, frolicking out in the endless glass-roots
network of personal bulletin board systems.  In 1993, there
were an estimated 60,000 boards in America; the population
of
boards had fully doubled since Operation Sundevil in 1990.
The
hobby was transmuting fitfully into a genuine industry.  The
board community were no longer obscure hobbyists; many
were still hobbyists and proud of it, but board sysops and
advanced board users had become a far more cohesive and
politically aware community, no longer allowing themselves
to
be obscure.

     The specter of cyberspace in the late 1980s, of
outwitted
authorities trembling in fear before teenage hacker whiz-
kids,
seemed downright antiquated by 1993.  Law enforcement
emphasis had changed, and the favorite electronic villain of
1993 was not the vandal child, but  the victimizer of
children,
the digital child pornographer.  "Operation Longarm,"  a
child-
pornography computer raid carried out by the previously
little-
known cyberspace rangers of the U.S. Customs Service, was
almost the size of Operation Sundevil, but received very
little
notice by comparison.

     The huge and well-organized "Operation Disconnect,"
an FBI strike against telephone rip-off con-artists, was
actually larger than Sundevil.  "Operation Disconnect" had
its
brief moment in the sun of publicity, and then vanished
utterly.
It was unfortunate that a law-enforcement affair as
apparently well-conducted as Operation Disconnect, which
pursued telecom adult career criminals a hundred times more
morally repugnant than teenage hackers, should have received
so little attention and fanfare, especially compared to the
abortive Sundevil and the basically disastrous efforts of
the
Chicago Computer Fraud and Abuse Task Force.  But the life
of
an electronic policeman is seldom easy.

     If any law enforcement event truly deserved full-scale
press coverage (while somehow managing to escape it), it was
the amazing saga of New York State Police Senior
Investigator Don Delaney Versus the Orchard Street Finger-
Hackers.  This story  probably represents the real future of
professional telecommunications crime in America.  The
finger-
hackers sold, and still sell, stolen long-distance phone
service
to a captive clientele of illegal aliens in New York City.
This
clientele is desperate to call home, yet as a group, illegal
aliens
have few legal means of obtaining standard phone service,
since their very presence in the United States is against
the
law.  The finger-hackers of Orchard Street were very unusual
"hackers," with an astonishing lack of any kind of genuine
technological knowledge.  And yet these New York call-sell
thieves showed a street-level ingenuity appalling in its
single-
minded sense of larceny.

     There was no dissident-hacker rhetoric about  freedom-
of-information among the finger-hackers.  Most of them came
out of the cocaine-dealing fraternity, and they retailed
stolen
calls with the same street-crime techniques of lookouts and
bagholders that a crack gang would employ.  This was down-
and-dirty, urban, ethnic, organized crime, carried out by
crime
families every day, for cash on the barrelhead, in the harsh
world of the streets.  The finger-hackers dominated certain
payphones in certain strikingly unsavory neighborhoods.
They
provided a service no one else would give to a clientele
with
little to lose.

     With such a vast supply of electronic crime  at hand,
Don
Delaney rocketed from a background in homicide to teaching
telecom crime at FLETC in less than three years.  Few can
rival
Delaney's hands-on, street-level experience in phone fraud.
Anyone in 1993 who still believes telecommunications crime
to
be something rare and arcane should have a few words with
Mr Delaney.  Don Delaney has also written two fine essays,
on
telecom fraud and computer crime, in Joseph Grau's *Criminal
and Civil Investigations Handbook* (McGraw Hill 1993).

     *Phrack* was still publishing in 1993, now under the
able
editorship of Erik Bloodaxe.  Bloodaxe made a determined
attempt to get law enforcement and corporate security to pay
real money for their electronic copies of *Phrack,* but, as
usual, these stalwart defenders of intellectual property
preferred to pirate the magazine.  Bloodaxe has still not
gotten
back any of his property from the seizure raids of March 1,
1990.  Neither has the Mentor, who is still the managing
editor
of Steve Jackson Games.

     Nor has Robert Izenberg, who has suspended his court
struggle to get his machinery back.  Mr Izenberg has
calculated
that his $20,000 of equipment seized in 1990 is, in 1993,
worth
$4,000 at most.  The missing software, also gone out his
door,
was long ago replaced.   He might, he says, sue for the sake
of
principle, but he feels that the people who seized his
machinery
have already been discredited, and won't be doing any more
seizures.  And even if his machinery were returned -- and in
good repair, which is doubtful -- it will  be essentially
worthless
by 1995.  Robert Izenberg no longer works for IBM, but has a
job programming for a major telecommunications company in
Austin.

     Steve Jackson won his case against the Secret Service
on
March 12, 1993, just over three years after the federal raid
on
his enterprise.   Thanks to the delaying tactics available
through the legal doctrine of "qualified immunity," Jackson
was
tactically forced to drop his suit against the individuals
William
Cook, Tim Foley, Barbara Golden and Henry Kluepfel.   (Cook,
Foley, Golden and Kluepfel did, however, testify during the
trial.)

     The Secret Service fought vigorously in the case,
battling
Jackson's lawyers right down the line, on the (mostly
previously untried) legal turf of the Electronic
Communications
Privacy Act and the Privacy Protection Act of 1980.  The
Secret
Service denied they were legally or morally responsible for
seizing the work of a publisher.   They claimed that (1)
Jackson's gaming "books" weren't real books anyhow, and (2)
the Secret Service didn't realize SJG Inc was a "publisher"
when they raided his offices, and (3) the books only
vanished by
accident because they merely happened to be inside the
computers the agents were appropriating.

     The Secret Service also denied any wrongdoing in
reading and erasing all the supposedly "private" e-mail
inside
Jackson's seized board, Illuminati.  The USSS attorneys
claimed the seizure did not violate the Electronic
Communications Privacy Act, because they weren't actually
"intercepting" electronic mail that was moving on a wire,
but
only electronic mail that was quietly sitting on a disk
inside
Jackson's computer.  They also claimed that USSS agents
hadn't read any of the private mail on Illuminati; and
anyway,
even supposing that they had, they were allowed to do that
by
the subpoena.

     The Jackson case became even more peculiar when the
Secret Service attorneys went so far as to allege that the
federal raid against the gaming company had actually
*improved Jackson's business*  thanks to the ensuing
nationwide publicity.

     It was a long and rather involved trial.  The judge
seemed most perturbed, not by the arcane matters of
electronic
law, but by the fact that the Secret Service could have
avoided
almost all the consequent trouble simply by giving Jackson
his
computers back in short order.   The Secret Service easily
could
have looked at everything in Jackson's computers, recorded
everything, and given the machinery back, and there would
have been no major scandal or federal court suit.  On the
contrary, everybody simply would have had a good laugh.
Unfortunately, it appeared that this idea had never entered
the
heads of the Chicago-based investigators.  They seemed to
have concluded unilaterally, and without due course of law,
that the world would be better off if Steve Jackson didn't
have
computers.  Golden and Foley claimed that they had both
never
even heard of the Privacy Protection Act.  Cook had heard of
the Act, but he'd decided on his own that the Privacy
Protection
Act had nothing to do with Steve Jackson.

     The Jackson case was also a very politicized trial,
both
sides deliberately angling for a long-term legal precedent
that
would stake-out big claims for their interests in
cyberspace.
Jackson and his EFF advisors tried hard to establish that
the
least e-mail remark of the lonely electronic pamphleteer
deserves the same somber civil-rights protection as that
afforded *The New York Times.*  By stark contrast, the
Secret
Service's attorneys argued boldly that the contents of an
electronic bulletin board have no more expectation of
privacy
than a heap of postcards.  In the final analysis, very
little was
firmly nailed down.  Formally, the legal rulings in the
Jackson
case apply only in the federal Western District of Texas.
It
was, however, established that these were real civil-
liberties
issues that powerful people were prepared to go to the
courthouse over; the seizure of bulletin board systems,
though
it still goes on, can be a perilous act for the seizer.
The Secret
Service owes Steve Jackson $50,000 in damages, and a
thousand dollars each to three of Jackson's angry and
offended
board users.  And Steve Jackson, rather than owning the
single-line bulletin board system "Illuminati" seized in
1990,
now rejoices in possession of a huge privately-owned
Internet
node, "io.com," with dozens of phone-lines on its  own T-1
trunk.

     Jackson has made the entire blow-by-blow narrative of
his case available electronically, for interested parties.
And yet, the
Jackson case may still not be over; a Secret Service appeal
seems
likely and the EFF is also gravely dissatisfied with the
ruling on
electronic interception.

     The WELL, home of the American electronic civil
libertarian movement, added two thousand more users and
dropped its aging Sequent computer in favor of a snappy new
Sun Sparcstation.  Search-and-seizure discussions on the
WELL
are now taking a decided back-seat to the current hot topic
in
digital civil liberties, unbreakable public-key encryption
for
private citizens.

     The Electronic Frontier Foundation left its modest home
in Boston to move inside the Washington Beltway of the
Clinton Administration.  Its new executive director, ECPA
pioneer and longtime ACLU activist Jerry Berman, gained a
reputation of a man adept as dining with tigers, as the EFF
devoted its attention to networking at the highest levels of
the
computer and telecommunications industry.  EFF's pro-
encryption lobby and anti-wiretapping initiative were
especially impressive, successfully assembling a herd of
highly
variegated industry camels under the same EFF tent, in open
and powerful opposition to the electronic ambitions of the
FBI
and the NSA.

     EFF had transmuted at light-speed from an insurrection
to an institution.  EFF Co-Founder Mitch Kapor once again
sidestepped the bureaucratic consequences of his own
success,
by remaining in Boston and adapting the role of EFF guru and
gray eminence.   John Perry Barlow, for his part, left
Wyoming,
quit the Republican Party, and moved to New York City,
accompanied by his swarm of cellular phones.   Mike Godwin
left Boston for Washington as EFF's official legal adviser
to the
electronically afflicted.

     After the Neidorf trial, Dorothy Denning further proved
her firm scholastic independence-of-mind by speaking up
boldly on the usefulness and social value of federal
wiretapping.  Many civil libertarians, who regarded the
practice of wiretapping with deep occult horror,  were
crestfallen to the point of comedy when nationally known
"hacker sympathizer" Dorothy Denning sternly defended
police and public interests in official eavesdropping.
However,
no amount of public uproar seemed to swerve the "quaint" Dr.
Denning in the slightest.  She not only made up her own
mind,
she made it up in public and then stuck to her guns.

     In 1993, the stalwarts of the Masters of Deception,
Phiber
Optik, Acid Phreak and Scorpion, finally fell afoul of the
machineries of legal prosecution.  Acid Phreak and Scorpion
were sent to prison for six months, six months of home
detention, 750 hours of community service, and, oddly, a $50
fine for conspiracy to commit computer crime.  Phiber Optik,
the computer intruder with perhaps the highest public
profile in
the entire world, took the longest to plead guilty, but,
facing
the possibility of ten years in jail, he finally did so.  He
was
sentenced to a year and a day in prison.

     As for the Atlanta wing of the Legion of Doom, Prophet,
Leftist and Urvile...   Urvile now works for a software
company in Atlanta.  He is still on probation and still
repaying
his enormous fine.  In fifteen months, he will once again be
allowed to own a personal computer.  He is still a convicted
federal felon, but has not had any legal difficulties since
leaving
prison.  He has lost contact with Prophet and Leftist.
Unfortunately, so have I, though not through lack of honest
effort.

     Knight Lightning, now 24,  is a technical writer for
the federal government in Washington DC.  He has still not
been accepted into law school, but having spent more than
his
share of time in the company of attorneys, he's come to
think
that maybe an MBA would be more to the point.   He still
owes
his attorneys $30,000, but the sum is dwindling steadily
since he
is manfully working two jobs.  Knight Lightning customarily
wears a suit and tie and carries a valise.  He has a federal
security clearance.

     Unindicted *Phrack* co-editor Taran King is also a
technical writer in Washington DC,  and recently got
married.

     Terminus did his time, got out of prison, and currently
lives in Silicon Valley where he is running a full-scale
Internet
node, "netsys.com."   He programs professionally for a
company specializing in satellite links for the Internet.

     Carlton Fitzpatrick still teaches at the Federal Law
Enforcement Training Center, but FLETC found that the issues
involved in sponsoring and running a bulletin board system
are
rather more complex than they at first appear to be.

     Gail Thackeray  briefly considered going into private
security, but then changed tack, and joined the Maricopa
County District Attorney's Office (with a salary).  She is
still
vigorously prosecuting electronic racketeering in Phoenix,
Arizona.

     The fourth consecutive Computers, Freedom and Privacy
Conference will take place in March 1994 in Chicago.

     As for Bruce Sterling... well *8-).  I thankfully
abandoned
my brief career as  a true-crime journalist and wrote a new
science fiction novel, *Heavy Weather,* and assembled a new
collection of short stories, *Globalhead.*  I also write
nonfiction regularly,  for the popular-science column in
*The
Magazine of  Fantasy and Science Fiction.*

     I like life better on the far side of the boundary
between
fantasy and reality;  but I've come to recognize that
reality has
an unfortunate  way of annexing fantasy for its own
purposes.
That's why I'm on the Police Liaison Committee for  EFF-
Austin, a local electronic civil liberties group (eff-
austin@tic.com).  I don't think I will ever get over my
experience of the Hacker Crackdown, and I expect to be
involved in electronic civil liberties activism for the rest
of my
life.

     It wouldn't be hard to find material for another book
on
computer crime and civil liberties issues.   I truly believe
that I
could write another book much like this one, every year.
Cyberspace is very big.  There's a lot going on out there,
far
more than can be adequately covered by the tiny, though
growing, cadre of network-literate reporters.  I do wish I
could
do more work on this topic, because the various people of
cyberspace are an element of our society that definitely
requires
sustained study and attention.

     But there's only one of me, and I have a lot on my
mind,
and, like most science fiction writers, I have a lot more
imagination than discipline.  Having done my stint as an
electronic-frontier reporter, my hat is off to those
stalwart few
who do it every day.  I may return to this topic some day,
but I
have no real plans to do so.  However, I didn't have any
real
plans to write "Hacker Crackdown," either.  Things happen,
nowadays.  There are landslides in cyberspace.  I'll just
have to
try and stay alert and on my feet.

     The electronic landscape changes with astounding speed.
We are living through the fastest technological
transformation
in human history.  I was glad to have a chance to document
cyberspace during one moment in its long mutation; a kind of
strobe-flash of the maelstrom.  This book is already out-of-
date, though, and it will be quite obsolete in another five
years.
It seems a pity.

     However, in about fifty years, I think this book might
seem quite interesting.  And in a hundred years, this book
should seem mind-bogglingly archaic and bizarre, and will
probably seem far weirder to an audience in 2092 than it
ever
seemed to the contemporary readership.

     Keeping up in cyberspace requires a great deal of
sustained attention.   Personally, I keep tabs with the
milieu by
reading the invaluable electronic magazine  Computer
underground Digest  (tk0jut2@mvs.cso.niu.edu with the
subject
header: SUB CuD and a message that says:  SUB CuD your
name     your.full.internet@address).  I also read Jack
Rickard's
bracingly iconoclastic *Boardwatch  Magazine* for print news
of the BBS and online community.  And, needless to say, I
read
*Wired,* the first magazine of the 1990s that actually looks
and
acts like it really belongs in this decade.  There are other
ways
to learn, of course, but these three outlets will guide your
efforts very well.

     When I myself want to publish something electronically,
which I'm doing with increasing frequency, I generally put
it on
the gopher at Texas Internet Consulting, who are my, well,
Texan Internet consultants  (tic.com).  This book can be
found
there.  I think it is a worthwhile act to let this work go
free.

     From thence, one's bread floats out onto the dark
waters
of cyberspace, only to return someday, tenfold.  And of
course,
thoroughly soggy, and riddled with an entire amazing
ecosystem of bizarre and gnawingly hungry cybermarine life-
forms.  For this author at least, that's all that really
counts.

     Thanks for your attention  *8-)

     Bruce Sterling  bruces@well.sf.ca.us  -- New Years' Day
1994, Austin Texas
