range,
he doesn't belong, he's not authorized, he doesn't
smell right, he's not keeping his proper place, he's
not one of us.  The focus of fear is the hacker, for
much the same reasons that Stanley's fancied
assailant is black.

     Stanley's demon can't go away, because he
doesn't exist.  Despite singleminded and
tremendous effort, he can't be arrested, sued, jailed,
or fired.  The only constructive way to do *anything*
about him is to learn more about Stanley himself.
This learning process may be repellent, it may be
ugly, it may involve grave elements of paranoiac
confusion, but it's necessary.  Knowing Stanley
requires something more than class-crossing
condescension.  It requires more than steely legal
objectivity.  It requires  human compassion and
sympathy.

     To know Stanley is to know his demon.  If you
know the other guy's demon, then maybe you'll
come to know some of your own.   You'll be able to
separate reality from illusion.   And then you won't
do your cause, and yourself, more harm than good.
Like poor damned Stanley from Chicago did.

                         #

     The Federal Computer Investigations
Committee (FCIC) is the most important and
influential organization in the realm of American
computer-crime.  Since the police of other countries
have largely taken their computer-crime cues from
American methods, the FCIC might well be called
the most important computer crime group in the
world.

     It is also, by federal standards, an organization
of great unorthodoxy.  State and local investigators
mix with federal agents.   Lawyers, financial auditors
and computer-security programmers trade notes
with street cops.  Industry vendors and telco security
people show up to explain their gadgetry and plead
for protection and justice.   Private investigators,
think-tank experts and industry pundits throw in
their two cents' worth.   The FCIC is the antithesis of
a formal bureaucracy.

     Members of the FCIC are obscurely proud of
this fact; they recognize their group as aberrant,  but
are entirely convinced that this, for them, outright
*weird* behavior is nevertheless *absolutely
necessary* to get their jobs done.

     FCIC regulars  -- from the Secret Service, the
FBI, the IRS, the Department of Labor, the offices of
federal attorneys, state police, the Air Force, from
military intelligence --  often attend meetings, held
hither and thither across the country,  at their own
expense.  The FCIC doesn't get grants.  It doesn't
charge membership fees.  It doesn't have a boss.  It
has no headquarters -- just a mail drop in
Washington DC, at the Fraud Division of the Secret
Service.  It doesn't have a budget.  It doesn't have
schedules.  It meets three times a year -- sort of.
Sometimes it issues publications, but the FCIC has
no regular publisher,  no treasurer, not even a
secretary.   There are no minutes of FCIC  meetings.
Non-federal people are considered "non-voting
members,"  but there's not much in the way of
elections.  There are no badges, lapel pins or
certificates of membership.   Everyone is on a first-
name basis.   There are about forty of them.  Nobody
knows how many, exactly.  People come, people go --
sometimes people "go" formally but still hang
around anyway.  Nobody has ever exactly figured
out what "membership" of this "Committee"
actually entails.

     Strange as this may seem to some, to anyone
familiar with the social world of computing, the
"organization" of the FCIC is very recognizable.

      For years now, economists and management
theorists have speculated that the tidal wave of the
information revolution would destroy rigid,
pyramidal bureaucracies, where everything is top-
down and centrally controlled.   Highly trained
"employees" would take on much greater autonomy,
being self-starting, and self-motivating,  moving
from place to place, task to task, with great speed
and fluidity.  "Ad-hocracy" would rule, with groups of
people spontaneously knitting together across
organizational lines, tackling the problem at hand,
applying intense computer-aided expertise to it, and
then vanishing whence they came.

     This is more or less what has actually happened
in the world of federal computer investigation.  With
the conspicuous exception of the phone companies,
which are after all over a hundred years old,
practically *every* organization that plays any
important role in this book functions just like the
FCIC.    The Chicago Task Force, the Arizona
Racketeering Unit, the Legion of Doom, the Phrack
crowd, the Electronic Frontier Foundation -- they
*all* look and act like "tiger teams" or "user's
groups."  They are all electronic ad-hocracies
leaping up spontaneously to attempt to meet a
need.

      Some are police.  Some are, by strict definition,
criminals.  Some are political interest-groups.   But
every single group has that same quality of apparent
spontaneity -- "Hey, gang!  My uncle's got a barn --
let's put on a show!"

     Every one of these groups is embarrassed by
this "amateurism," and, for the sake of their public
image in a world of non-computer people,  they all
attempt to look as stern and formal and impressive
as possible.    These electronic frontier-dwellers
resemble groups of nineteenth-century pioneers
hankering after the respectability of statehood.
There are however,  two crucial differences in the
historical experience of these "pioneers" of the
nineteeth and twenty-first centuries.

       First, powerful information technology *does*
play into the hands of small, fluid, loosely organized
groups.  There have always been "pioneers,"
"hobbyists," "amateurs," "dilettantes," "volunteers,"
"movements," "users' groups" and "blue-ribbon
panels of experts" around.   But a group of this kind -
- when technically equipped to ship huge amounts
of specialized information, at lightning speed, to its
members, to government, and to the press -- is
simply a different kind of animal.   It's like the
difference between an eel and an electric eel.

     The second crucial change is that American
society is currently in a state  approaching
permanent technological revolution.  In the world of
computers particularly,  it is practically impossible to
*ever* stop being a  "pioneer," unless you either
drop dead or deliberately jump off the bus.  The
scene has never slowed down enough to become
well-institutionalized.  And after twenty, thirty, forty
years the "computer revolution" continues to spread,
to permeate new corners of society.   Anything that
really works is already obsolete.

     If you spend your entire working life as a
"pioneer," the word "pioneer" begins to lose its
meaning.  Your way of life looks less and less like an
introduction to "something else" more stable and
organized,  and more and more like *just the way
things are.*   A "permanent revolution" is really a
contradiction in terms.  If "turmoil"  lasts long
enough, it simply becomes *a new kind of society*  --
still the same game of history, but new players, new
rules.

     Apply this to the world of late twentieth-century
law enforcement, and the implications are  novel
and puzzling indeed.  Any bureaucratic rulebook
you write about computer-crime will be flawed when
you write it, and almost an antique by the time it
sees print.   The fluidity and fast reactions of the
FCIC give them a great advantage in this regard,
which explains their success.  Even with the best will
in the world (which it does not, in fact, possess) it is
impossible for an organization the size of the U.S.
Federal Bureau of Investigation to get up to speed
on the theory and practice of computer crime.   If
they tried to train all their agents to do this, it would
be *suicidal,*  as they would *never be able to do
anything else.*

      The FBI does try to train its agents in the basics
of electronic crime, at their base in Quantico,
Virginia.   And the Secret Service, along with many
other law enforcement groups, runs quite successful
and well-attended training courses on wire fraud,
business crime, and computer intrusion  at the
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC,
pronounced "fletsy") in Glynco, Georgia.   But the
best efforts of these bureaucracies does not remove
the absolute need for a "cutting-edge mess" like the
FCIC.

     For you see -- the members of FCIC *are* the
trainers of the rest of law enforcement.  Practically
and literally speaking, they are the Glynco
computer-crime faculty by another name.  If the
FCIC went over a cliff on a bus, the U.S. law
enforcement community would be rendered deaf
dumb and blind in the world of computer crime, and
would swiftly feel a desperate need to reinvent them.
And this is no time to go starting from scratch.

     On June 11, 1991, I once again arrived in
Phoenix, Arizona, for the latest meeting of the
Federal Computer Investigations Committee.  This
was more or less the twentieth meeting of this stellar
group.   The count was uncertain, since nobody
could figure out whether to include the meetings of
"the Colluquy," which is what the FCIC was called in
the mid-1980s before it had even managed to obtain
the dignity of its own acronym.

     Since my last visit to Arizona, in May, the local
AzScam bribery scandal had resolved itself in a
general muddle of humiliation.  The Phoenix chief of
police, whose agents had videotaped nine state
legislators up to no good, had resigned his office in a
tussle with the Phoenix city council over the
propriety of his undercover operations.

     The Phoenix Chief could now join Gail
Thackeray and eleven of her closest associates in
the shared experience of politically motivated
unemployment.   As of June, resignations were still
continuing at the Arizona Attorney General's office,
which could be interpreted as either a New Broom
Sweeping Clean or a Night of the Long Knives Part
II, depending on your point of view.

     The meeting of FCIC was held at the Scottsdale
Hilton Resort. Scottsdale is a wealthy suburb of
Phoenix, known as "Scottsdull" to scoffing local
trendies, but well-equipped with posh shopping-
malls and manicured lawns, while conspicuously
undersupplied with homeless derelicts.   The
Scottsdale Hilton Resort was a sprawling hotel in
postmodern  crypto-Southwestern style.  It featured
a "mission bell tower" plated in turquoise tile and
vaguely resembling a Saudi minaret.

     Inside it was all barbarically striped Santa Fe
Style decor.   There was a health spa downstairs and
a large oddly-shaped pool in the patio.  A poolside
umbrella-stand offered Ben and Jerry's politically
correct Peace Pops.

     I registered as a member of FCIC, attaining a
handy discount rate, then went in search of the Feds.
Sure enough, at the back of the hotel grounds came
the unmistakable sound of Gail Thackeray holding
forth.

     Since I had also attended the Computers
Freedom and Privacy conference (about which more
later), this was the second time I had seen
Thackeray in a group of her law enforcement
colleagues.   Once again I was struck by how simply
pleased they seemed to see her.   It was natural that
she'd get *some* attention, as Gail was one of two
women in a group of some thirty men; but there was
a lot more to it than that.

     Gail Thackeray personifies the social glue of the
FCIC.  They could give a damn about her losing her
job with the Attorney General.  They were sorry
about it, of course, but hell, they'd all lost jobs.   If
they were the kind of guys who liked steady  boring
jobs, they would never have gotten into computer
work in the first place.

     I wandered into her circle and was immediately
introduced to five strangers.  The conditions of my
visit at FCIC were reviewed.  I would not quote
anyone directly.  I would not tie opinions expressed
to the agencies of the attendees.  I would not (a
purely hypothetical example) report the
conversation of a guy from the Secret Service talking
quite civilly to  a guy from the FBI, as these two
agencies *never*  talk to each other, and the IRS
(also present, also hypothetical) *never talks to
anybody.*

     Worse yet, I was forbidden to attend the first
conference.  And I didn't.  I have no idea what the
FCIC was up to behind closed doors that afternoon.
I rather suspect that they were engaging in a frank
and thorough confession of their errors, goof-ups
and blunders, as this has been a feature of every
FCIC meeting since their legendary Memphis beer-
bust of 1986.  Perhaps the single greatest attraction
of FCIC is that it is a place where you can go, let your
hair down, and completely level with people who
actually comprehend what you are talking about.
Not only do they understand you, but they *really
pay attention,*  they are *grateful for your insights,*
and they *forgive you,*  which in nine cases out of
ten is something even your boss can't do, because as
soon as you start talking "ROM," "BBS," or "T-1
trunk," his eyes glaze over.

     I had nothing much to do that afternoon.  The
FCIC were beavering away in their  conference
room.  Doors were firmly closed, windows too dark to
peer through.  I wondered what a real hacker, a
computer intruder, would do at a meeting like this.

     The answer came at once.  He would "trash" the
place.  Not reduce the place to trash  in some orgy of
vandalism; that's not the use of the term in the
hacker milieu.  No, he would quietly *empty the
trash baskets* and silently raid any valuable data
indiscreetly thrown away.

     Journalists have been known to do this.
(Journalists hunting information have been known
to do almost every single unethical thing that
hackers have ever done.  They also throw in a few
awful techniques all their own.)  The legality of
'trashing' is somewhat dubious but it is not in fact
flagrantly illegal.   It was, however, absurd to
contemplate trashing the FCIC.  These people knew
all about trashing.   I wouldn't last fifteen seconds.

     The idea sounded interesting, though.   I'd been
hearing a lot about the practice lately.  On the spur
of the moment, I decided I would try trashing the
office *across the hall*  from the FCIC, an area
which had nothing to do with the investigators.

     The office was tiny; six chairs, a table....
Nevertheless, it was open, so I dug around in its
plastic trash can.

     To my utter astonishment, I came up with the
torn scraps of a SPRINT long-distance phone bill.
More digging produced a bank statement and the
scraps of a hand-written letter, along with gum,
cigarette ashes, candy wrappers and a day-old-issue
of USA TODAY.

     The trash went back in its receptacle while the
scraps of data went into  my travel bag.  I detoured
through the hotel souvenir shop for some Scotch
tape and went up to my room.

     Coincidence or not, it was quite true.  Some poor
soul had, in fact, thrown a SPRINT bill into the
hotel's trash.   Date May 1991, total amount due:
$252.36.  Not a business phone, either, but a
residential bill, in the name of someone called
Evelyn (not her real name).  Evelyn's records showed
a ## PAST DUE BILL ##!   Here was her nine-digit
account ID.    Here was a stern computer-printed
warning:

 "TREAT YOUR FONCARD AS YOU WOULD ANY
CREDIT CARD.  TO SECURE AGAINST FRAUD,
NEVER GIVE YOUR FONCARD NUMBER OVER
THE PHONE UNLESS YOU INITIATED THE
CALL.  IF YOU RECEIVE SUSPICIOUS CALLS
PLEASE NOTIFY CUSTOMER SERVICE
IMMEDIATELY!"

     I examined my watch.  Still plenty of time left for
the FCIC to carry on.  I sorted out the scraps of
Evelyn's SPRINT bill and re-assembled them with
fresh Scotch tape.  Here was her ten-digit
FONCARD number.   Didn't seem to have the ID
number necessary to cause real fraud trouble.

     I did, however, have Evelyn's home phone
number.  And the phone numbers for a whole crowd
of Evelyn's long-distance friends and acquaintances.
In San Diego, Folsom, Redondo, Las Vegas, La Jolla,
Topeka, and Northampton Massachusetts.  Even
somebody in Australia!

     I examined other documents.  Here was a bank
statement.  It was Evelyn's IRA account down at a
bank in San Mateo California (total balance
$1877.20).  Here was a charge-card bill for $382.64.
She was paying it off bit by bit.

     Driven by motives that were completely
unethical and prurient, I now examined the
handwritten notes.  They had been torn fairly
thoroughly, so much so that it took me almost an
entire five minutes to reassemble them.

     They were drafts of a love letter.  They had been
written on the lined stationery of Evelyn's employer,
a biomedical company.  Probably written at work
when she should have been doing something else.

     "Dear Bob," (not his real name)  "I guess in
everyone's life there comes a time when hard
decisions have to be made, and this is a difficult one
for me -- very upsetting.  Since you haven't called
me, and I don't understand why, I can only surmise
it's because you don't want to.  I thought I would
have heard from you Friday.  I did have a few
unusual problems with my phone and possibly you
tried, I hope so.
     "Robert, you asked me to 'let go'..."

     The first note ended.  *Unusual problems with
her phone?*  I looked swiftly at the next note.

     "Bob, not hearing from you for the whole
weekend has left me very perplexed..."

      Next draft.

     "Dear Bob, there is so much I don't understand
right now, and I wish I did.  I wish I could talk to you,
but for some unknown reason you have elected not
to call -- this is so difficult for me to understand..."

     She tried again.

     "Bob, Since I have always held you in such high
esteem, I had every hope that we could remain good
friends, but now one essential ingredient is missing -
- respect.  Your ability to discard people when their
purpose is served is appalling to me.  The kindest
thing you could do for me now is to leave me alone.
You are no longer welcome in my heart or home..."

     Try again.

     "Bob, I wrote a very factual note to you to say
how much respect I had lost for you, by the way you
treat people, me in particular, so uncaring and cold.
The kindest thing you can do for me is to leave me
alone entirely, as you are no longer welcome in my
heart or home. I would appreciate it if you could
retire your debt to me as soon as possible -- I wish no
link to you in any way.  Sincerely, Evelyn."

     Good heavens, I thought, the bastard actually
owes her money!  I turned to the next page.

     "Bob:  very simple.  GOODBYE!  No more mind
games -- no more fascination -- no more coldness --
no more respect for you!  It's over -- Finis.  Evie"

     There were two versions of the final brushoff
letter, but they read about the same.  Maybe she
hadn't sent it.  The final item in my illicit and
shameful booty was an envelope addressed to "Bob"
at his home address, but it had no stamp on it and it
hadn't been mailed.

     Maybe she'd just been blowing off steam
because her rascal boyfriend had neglected to call
her one weekend.   Big deal.  Maybe they'd kissed
and made up, maybe she and Bob were down at
Pop's Chocolate Shop now, sharing a malted.  Sure.

     Easy to find out.  All I had to do was call Evelyn
up.  With a half-clever story and enough brass-
plated gall I could probably trick the truth out of her.
Phone-phreaks and hackers deceive people over the
phone all the time.  It's called "social engineering."
Social engineering is a very common practice in the
underground, and almost magically effective.
Human beings are almost always the weakest link in
computer security.  The simplest way to learn Things
You Are Not Meant To Know is simply to call up
and exploit the knowledgeable people.   With social
engineering, you use the bits of specialized
knowledge you already have as a key, to manipulate
people into believing that you are legitimate.  You
can then coax, flatter, or frighten them into revealing
almost anything you want to know.  Deceiving
people (especially over the phone) is easy and fun.
Exploiting their gullibility is very gratifying; it makes
you feel very superior to them.

     If I'd been a  malicious hacker on a trashing
raid, I would now have Evelyn very much in my
power.  Given all this inside  data, it wouldn't take
much effort at all to invent a convincing lie.  If I were
ruthless enough, and jaded enough, and clever
enough, this momentary indiscretion of hers --
maybe committed in tears, who knows -- could cause
her a whole world of confusion and grief.

     I didn't even have to have a *malicious*  motive.
Maybe I'd be "on her side," and call up Bob instead,
and anonymously threaten to break both his
kneecaps if he didn't take Evelyn out for a steak
dinner pronto.   It was still profoundly *none of my
business.*   To have gotten this knowledge at all was
a sordid act and to use it would be to inflict a sordid
injury.

     To do all these awful things would require
exactly zero high-tech expertise.  All it would take
was the willingness to do it and a certain amount of
bent imagination.

     I went back downstairs. The hard-working FCIC,
who had labored forty-five minutes over their
schedule, were through for the day, and adjourned
to the hotel bar.  We all had a beer.

      I had a chat with a guy about "Isis," or rather
IACIS, the International Association of Computer
Investigation Specialists.  They're into "computer
forensics,"  the techniques of picking computer-
systems apart without destroying vital evidence.
IACIS, currently run out of Oregon, is comprised of
investigators in the U.S., Canada, Taiwan and
Ireland.  "Taiwan and Ireland?"  I said.  Are *Taiwan*
and *Ireland*  really in the forefront of this stuff?
Well not exactly, my informant admitted.  They just
happen to have been the first ones to have caught
on by word of mouth.  Still, the international angle
counts, because this is obviously an international
problem.  Phone-lines go everywhere.

     There was a Mountie here from the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police.  He seemed to be having
quite a good time.   Nobody had flung this Canadian
out because he might pose a foreign security risk.
These are cyberspace cops.  They still worry a lot
about "jurisdictions," but mere geography is the
least of their troubles.

     NASA had failed to show.  NASA suffers a lot
from computer intrusions, in particular from
Australian raiders and a well-trumpeted Chaos
Computer Club case,  and in 1990 there was a brief
press flurry when it was revealed that one of NASA's
Houston branch-exchanges had been systematically
ripped off by a gang of phone-phreaks.   But the
NASA guys had had their funding cut.  They were
stripping everything.

     Air Force OSI, its Office of Special
Investigations, is the *only*  federal entity dedicated
full-time to computer security.  They'd been
expected to show up in force, but some of them had
cancelled -- a Pentagon budget pinch.

     As the empties piled up, the guys began joshing
around and telling war-stories.  "These are cops,"
Thackeray said tolerantly.  "If they're not talking
shop they talk about women and beer."

     I heard the story about the guy who, asked for "a
copy" of a computer disk, *photocopied the label on
it.*  He put the floppy disk onto the glass plate of a
photocopier.  The blast of static when the copier
worked  completely erased all the real information
on the disk.

     Some other poor souls threw a whole bag of
confiscated diskettes into the squad-car trunk next
to the police radio.  The powerful radio signal
blasted them, too.

      We heard a bit about Dave Geneson, the first
computer prosecutor, a mainframe-runner in Dade
County, turned lawyer.   Dave Geneson was one guy
who had hit the ground running, a signal virtue in
making the transition to computer-crime.  It was
generally agreed that it was easier to learn the world
of computers first, then police or prosecutorial work.
You could take certain computer people and train
'em to successful police work -- but of course they
had to have the *cop mentality.*  They had to have
street smarts.  Patience.  Persistence.  And
discretion.   You've got to make sure they're not hot-
shots, show-offs,  "cowboys."

     Most of the folks in the bar had backgrounds in
military intelligence, or drugs, or homicide.  It was
rudely opined that "military intelligence" was a
contradiction in terms, while even the grisly world of
homicide was considered cleaner than drug
enforcement.  One guy had been 'way undercover
doing dope-work in Europe for four years straight.
"I'm almost recovered now," he said deadpan, with
the acid black humor that is pure cop.  "Hey, now I
can say *fucker*  without putting *mother*  in front
of it."

     "In the cop world," another guy said earnestly,
"everything is good and bad, black and white.  In the
computer world everything is gray."

     One guy -- a founder of the FCIC, who'd been
with the group since it was just the Colluquy --
described his own introduction to the field.  He'd
been a Washington DC homicide guy called in on a
"hacker" case.  From the word "hacker," he naturally
assumed he was on the trail of a knife-wielding
marauder, and went to the computer center
expecting blood and a body.  When he finally
figured out what was happening there (after loudly
demanding, in vain, that the programmers "speak
English"),  he called headquarters and told them he
was clueless about computers.  They told him
nobody else knew diddly either, and to get the hell
back to work.

     So, he said, he had proceeded by comparisons.
By analogy.  By metaphor.  "Somebody broke in to
your computer, huh?"  Breaking and entering; I can
understand that.  How'd he get in?  "Over the phone-
lines."  Harassing phone-calls, I can understand
that!  What we need here is a tap and a trace!

     It worked.  It was better than nothing.   And it
worked a lot faster when he got hold of another cop
who'd done something similar.  And then the two of
them got another, and another, and pretty soon the
Colluquy was a happening thing.  It helped a lot that
everybody seemed to know Carlton Fitzpatrick, the
data-processing trainer in Glynco.

     The ice broke big-time in Memphis in '86.  The
Colluquy had attracted a bunch of new guys -- Secret
Service, FBI, military, other feds, heavy guys.
Nobody wanted to tell anybody anything.  They
suspected that if word got back to the home office
they'd all be fired.  They passed an uncomfortably
guarded afternoon.

     The formalities got them nowhere.  But after the
formal session was over, the organizers brought in a
case of beer.  As soon as the participants knocked it
off with the bureaucratic ranks and turf-fighting,
everything changed.  "I bared my soul," one veteran
reminisced proudly.  By nightfall they were building
pyramids of empty beer-cans and doing everything
but composing a team fight song.

     FCIC were not the only computer-crime people
around.  There was DATTA (District Attorneys'
Technology Theft Association),  though they mostly
specialized in chip theft, intellectual property, and
black-market cases.  There was HTCIA  (High Tech
Computer Investigators Association), also out in
Silicon Valley, a year older than FCIC and featuring
brilliant people like Donald Ingraham.  There was
LEETAC (Law Enforcement Electronic Technology
Assistance Committee)  in Florida, and computer-
crime units in Illinois and Maryland and Texas and
Ohio and Colorado and Pennsylvania.   But these
were local groups.  FCIC were the first to really
network nationally and on a federal level.

     FCIC people live on the phone lines.  Not on
bulletin board systems -- they know very well what
boards are, and they know that  boards aren't secure.
Everyone in the FCIC has a voice-phone bill like you
wouldn't believe.  FCIC people have been tight with
the telco people for a long time.  Telephone
cyberspace is their native habitat.

     FCIC has three basic sub-tribes:  the trainers,
the security people, and the investigators.  That's
why it's called an "Investigations Committee" with
no mention of the term "computer-crime" -- the
dreaded "C-word."   FCIC, officially, is "an
association of agencies rather than individuals;"
unofficially, this field is small enough that the
influence of individuals and individual expertise is
paramount.  Attendance is by invitation only, and
most everyone in FCIC considers himself a prophet
without honor in his own house.

     Again and again I heard this,  with different
terms but identical sentiments.  "I'd been sitting in
the wilderness talking to myself."  "I was totally
isolated."  "I was desperate."  "FCIC is the best thing
there is about computer crime in America."   "FCIC
is what really works."  "This is where you hear real
people telling you what's really happening out there,
not just lawyers picking nits."  "We taught each
other everything we knew."

     The sincerity of these statements convinces me
that this is true.  FCIC is the real thing and it is
invaluable.  It's also very sharply at odds with the
rest of the traditions and power structure in
American law enforcement.   There probably  hasn't
been anything around as loose and go-getting as the
FCIC since the start of the U.S. Secret Service in the
1860s.   FCIC people are living like twenty-first-
century people in a twentieth-century environment,
and while there's a great deal to be said for that,
there's also a great deal to be said against it, and
those against it happen to control the budgets.

     I listened to two FCIC guys from Jersey compare
life histories.  One of them had been a biker in a
fairly heavy-duty gang in the 1960s.  "Oh, did you
know so-and-so?" said the other guy from Jersey.
"Big guy, heavyset?"

     "Yeah, I knew him."

     "Yeah, he was one of ours.  He was our plant in
the gang."

     "Really?  Wow!  Yeah, I knew him.  Helluva guy."

     Thackeray reminisced at length about being
tear-gassed blind in the November 1969  antiwar
protests in Washington Circle, covering them for
her college paper.  "Oh yeah, I was there," said
another cop.  "Glad to hear that tear gas hit
somethin'.  Haw haw haw."  He'd been so blind
himself, he confessed, that later that day he'd
arrested a small tree.

     FCIC are an odd group, sifted out by
coincidence and necessity, and turned into a new
kind of cop.   There are a lot of specialized cops in
the world -- your bunco guys, your drug guys, your
tax guys, but the only group that matches FCIC for
sheer isolation are probably the child-pornography
people.  Because they both deal with conspirators
who are desperate to exchange forbidden data and
also desperate to hide; and because nobody else in
law enforcement even wants to hear about it.

     FCIC people tend to change jobs a lot.  They
tend not to get the equipment and training they
want and need.  And they tend to get sued quite
often.

     As the night wore on and a band set up in the
bar, the talk grew darker.  Nothing ever gets done in
government, someone opined, until there's a
*disaster.*  Computing disasters are awful, but
there's no denying that they greatly  help the
credibility of FCIC people.  The Internet Worm, for
instance.  "For years we'd been warning about that --
but it's nothing compared to what's coming."  They
expect horrors, these people.  They know that
nothing will really get done until there is a horror.

                         #

     Next day we heard an extensive briefing from a
guy who'd been a computer cop, gotten into hot
water with an Arizona city council, and now installed
computer networks for a living (at a considerable
rise in pay).  He talked about pulling fiber-optic
networks apart.

     Even a single computer, with enough
peripherals, is a literal "network" -- a bunch of
machines all cabled together, generally with a
complexity that puts stereo units to shame.   FCIC
people invent and publicize  methods of seizing
computers and maintaining their evidence.   Simple
things, sometimes, but vital rules of thumb for street
cops, who nowadays often stumble across a busy
computer in the midst of a drug investigation or a
white-collar bust.  For instance:  Photograph the
system before you touch it.  Label the ends of all the
cables before you detach anything.  "Park" the heads
on the disk drives before you move them.  Get the
diskettes.  Don't put the diskettes in magnetic fields.
Don't write on diskettes with ballpoint pens.  Get the
manuals.  Get the printouts.  Get the handwritten
notes.  Copy data before you look at it, and then
examine the copy instead of the original.

     Now our lecturer distributed copied diagrams of
a typical LAN or "Local Area Network", which
happened to be out of Connecticut.  *One hundred
and fifty-nine*  desktop computers, each with its own
peripherals.  Three "file servers."  Five "star
couplers" each with thirty-two ports.  One sixteen-
port coupler off in the corner office.   All these
machines talking to each other, distributing
electronic mail, distributing software, distributing,
quite possibly, criminal evidence.  All linked by high-
capacity fiber-optic cable.  A bad guy -- cops talk a
lot about "bad guys"  -- might be lurking on PC #47
or #123 and distributing his ill doings onto some
dupe's "personal"  machine in another office -- or
another floor -- or, quite possibly, two or three miles
away!   Or,  conceivably, the evidence might be
"data-striped" -- split up into meaningless slivers
stored, one by one, on a whole crowd of different disk
drives.

     The lecturer challenged us for solutions.  I for
one was utterly clueless.  As far as I could figure, the
Cossacks were at the gate; there were probably more
disks in this single building than were seized during
the entirety of Operation Sundevil.

     "Inside informant," somebody said.  Right.
There's always the human angle, something easy to
forget when contemplating the arcane recesses of
high technology.  Cops are skilled at getting people
to talk, and computer people, given a chair and
some sustained attention, will talk about their
computers till their throats go raw.  There's a case on
record of a single question -- "How'd you do it?" --
eliciting a forty-five-minute videotaped confession
from a computer criminal who not only completely
incriminated himself but drew helpful diagrams.

     Computer people talk.  Hackers *brag.*   Phone-
phreaks talk *pathologically*  -- why else are they
stealing phone-codes, if not to natter for ten hours
straight to their friends on an opposite seaboard?
Computer-literate people do in fact possess an
arsenal of nifty gadgets and techniques that would
allow them to conceal all kinds of exotic
skullduggery, and if they could only *shut up*  about
it, they could probably get away with all manner of
amazing information-crimes.   But that's just not how
it works -- or at least, that's not how it's worked *so
far.*

     Most every phone-phreak ever busted has
swiftly implicated his mentors, his disciples, and his
friends.  Most every white-collar computer-criminal,
smugly convinced that his clever scheme is
bulletproof,  swiftly learns otherwise when, for the
first time in his life, an actual no-kidding policeman
leans over, grabs the front of his shirt, looks him
right in the eye and says:  "All right, *asshole* --  you
and me are going downtown!"   All the hardware in
the world will not insulate your nerves from these
actual real-life sensations of terror and guilt.

     Cops know ways to get from point A to point Z
without thumbing through every letter in some
smart-ass bad-guy's  alphabet.  Cops know how to
cut to the chase.  Cops know a lot of things other
people don't know.

     Hackers know a lot of things other people don't
know, too.  Hackers know, for instance, how to sneak
into your computer through the phone-lines.  But
cops  can show up *right on your doorstep*  and
carry off *you*  and your computer in separate steel
boxes.   A cop interested in hackers can grab them
and grill them.  A hacker interested in cops has to
depend on hearsay, underground legends, and what
cops are willing to publicly reveal.  And the Secret
Service didn't get named "the *Secret*  Service"
because they blab a lot.

     Some people, our lecturer informed us, were
under the mistaken impression that it was
"impossible" to tap a fiber-optic line.  Well, he
announced, he and his son had just whipped up a
fiber-optic tap in his workshop at home.  He passed
it around the audience, along with a circuit-covered
LAN plug-in card so we'd all recognize one if we saw
it on a case.  We all had a look.

     The tap was a classic "Goofy Prototype" -- a
thumb-length rounded metal cylinder with a pair of
plastic brackets on it.  From one end dangled three
thin black cables, each of which ended in a tiny
black plastic cap.   When you plucked the safety-cap
off the end of a cable,  you could see the glass fiber  -
- no thicker than a pinhole.

       Our lecturer informed us that the metal
cylinder was a "wavelength division multiplexer."
Apparently, what one did was to cut the fiber-optic
cable, insert two of the legs into the cut to complete
the network again, and then read any passing data
on the line by hooking up the third leg to some kind
of monitor.  Sounded simple enough.  I wondered
why nobody had thought of it before.  I also
wondered whether this guy's son back at the
workshop had any teenage friends.

     We had a break.  The guy sitting next to me was
wearing a giveaway baseball cap advertising the Uzi
submachine gun.  We had a desultory chat about
the merits of Uzis.  Long a favorite of the Secret
Service, it seems Uzis went out of fashion with the
advent of the Persian Gulf War, our Arab allies
taking some offense at Americans toting Israeli
weapons.  Besides, I was informed by another
expert, Uzis jam.  The equivalent weapon of choice
today is the Heckler & Koch, manufactured in
Germany.

       The guy with the Uzi cap was a forensic
photographer.  He also did a lot of photographic
surveillance work in computer crime cases.   He
used to, that is, until the firings in Phoenix.  He was
now a private investigator and, with his wife, ran a
photography salon specializing in weddings and
portrait photos.  At -- one must repeat -- a
considerable rise in income.

     He was still FCIC.  If you were FCIC, and you
needed to talk to an expert about forensic
photography, well, there he was, willing and able.  If
he hadn't shown up, people would have missed him.

     Our lecturer had raised the point that
preliminary investigation of a computer system is
vital before any seizure is undertaken.  It's vital to
understand how many machines are in there, what
kinds there are, what kind of operating system they
use,  how many people use them, where the actual
data itself is stored.  To simply barge into an office
demanding "all the computers" is a recipe for swift
disaster.

     This entails some discreet inquiries beforehand.
In fact, what it entails is basically undercover work.
An intelligence operation.   *Spying,*  not to put too
fine a point on it.

     In a chat after the lecture, I asked an attendee
whether "trashing" might work.

     I received a swift briefing on the theory and
practice of "trash covers."  Police "trash covers," like
"mail covers" or like wiretaps, require the agreement
of a judge.  This obtained, the "trashing" work of cops
is just like that of hackers, only more so and much
better organized.  So much so, I was informed, that
mobsters in Phoenix make extensive use of locked
garbage cans picked up by a specialty high-security
trash company.

     In one case, a tiger team of Arizona cops had
trashed a local residence for four months.  Every
week they showed up on the municipal garbage
truck, disguised as garbagemen, and carried the
contents of the suspect cans off to a shade tree,
where they combed through the garbage -- a messy
task, especially considering that one of the
occupants was undergoing kidney dialysis.  All
useful documents were cleaned, dried and
examined.  A discarded typewriter-ribbon was an
especially valuable source of data, as its long one-
strike ribbon of film contained the contents of every
letter mailed out of the house.  The letters were
neatly retyped by a police secretary equipped with a
large desk-mounted magnifying glass.

     There is something weirdly disquieting about
the whole subject of "trashing" -- an unsuspected
and indeed rather disgusting mode of deep personal
vulnerability.  Things that we pass by every day, that
we take utterly for granted, can be exploited with so
little work.   Once discovered, the knowledge of these
vulnerabilities tend to spread.

     Take the lowly subject of *manhole covers.*  The
humble manhole cover reproduces many of the
dilemmas of computer-security in miniature.
Manhole covers are, of course, technological
artifacts, access-points to our buried urban
infrastructure.  To the vast majority of us, manhole
covers are invisible.  They are also vulnerable.  For
many years now, the Secret Service has made a
point of caulking manhole covers along all routes of
the Presidential motorcade.   This is, of course, to
deter terrorists from leaping out of underground
ambush or, more likely, planting remote-control car-
smashing bombs beneath the street.

     Lately, manhole covers have seen more and
more criminal exploitation, especially in New York
City.  Recently, a telco in New York City discovered
that a cable television service had been sneaking
into telco manholes and installing cable service
alongside the phone-lines -- *without paying
royalties.*   New York companies have also suffered
a general plague of (a) underground copper cable
theft; (b) dumping of garbage, including toxic waste,
and (c) hasty dumping of murder victims.

     Industry complaints reached the ears of an
innovative New England industrial-security
company, and the result was a new product known
as "the Intimidator," a thick titanium-steel bolt with
a precisely machined head that requires a special
device to unscrew.  All these "keys" have registered
serial numbers kept on file with the manufacturer.
There are now some thousands of these
"Intimidator" bolts being sunk into American
pavements wherever our President passes, like
some macabre parody of strewn roses.   They are
also spreading as fast as steel dandelions around US
military bases and many centers of private industry.

     Quite likely it has never occurred to you to  peer
under a manhole cover, perhaps climb down and
walk around down there with a flashlight, just to see
what it's like.  Formally speaking, this might be
trespassing, but if you didn't hurt anything, and
didn't make an absolute habit of it, nobody would
really care.  The freedom to sneak under manholes
was likely a freedom you never intended to exercise.

     You now are rather less likely to have that
freedom at all.  You may never even have missed it
until you read about it here, but if you're in New
York City it's gone, and elsewhere it's likely going.
This is one of the things that crime, and the reaction
to crime,  does to us.

     The tenor of the meeting now changed as the
Electronic Frontier Foundation arrived.  The EFF,
whose personnel and history will be examined in
detail in the next chapter, are a pioneering civil
liberties group who arose in direct response to the
Hacker Crackdown of 1990.

     Now Mitchell Kapor, the Foundation's
president, and Michael Godwin, its chief attorney,
were confronting federal law enforcement *mano a
mano* for the first time ever.  Ever alert to the
manifold uses of publicity, Mitch Kapor and Mike
Godwin had brought their own journalist in tow:
Robert Draper, from Austin, whose recent well-
received book about ROLLING STONE magazine
was still on the stands.  Draper was on assignment
for TEXAS MONTHLY.

     The Steve Jackson/EFF civil lawsuit against the
Chicago Computer Fraud and Abuse Task Force was
a matter of considerable regional interest in Texas.
There were now two Austinite journalists here on the
case.  In fact, counting Godwin (a former Austinite
and former journalist) there were three of us.  Lunch
was like Old Home Week.

     Later, I took Draper up to my hotel room.  We
had a long frank talk about the case, networking
earnestly like a miniature freelance-journo version
of the FCIC:  privately confessing the numerous
blunders of journalists covering the story, and trying
hard to figure out who was who and what the hell was
really going on out there.  I showed Draper
everything I had dug out of the Hilton trashcan.  We
pondered the ethics of "trashing" for a while, and
agreed that they were dismal.  We also agreed that
finding a SPRINT bill on your first time out was a
heck of a coincidence.

     First I'd "trashed" -- and now, mere hours later,
I'd bragged to someone else.   Having entered the
lifestyle of hackerdom, I was now, unsurprisingly,
following  its logic.  Having discovered something
remarkable through a surreptitious action, I of
course *had*  to "brag," and to drag the passing
Draper into my iniquities.  I felt I needed a witness.
Otherwise nobody would have believed what I'd
discovered....

     Back at the meeting, Thackeray cordially, if
rather tentatively, introduced Kapor and Godwin to
her colleagues.  Papers were distributed.  Kapor took
center stage.  The brilliant Bostonian high-tech
entrepreneur, normally the hawk in his own
administration and quite an effective public
speaker, seemed visibly nervous, and frankly
admitted as much.   He began by saying he
consided computer-intrusion to be morally wrong,
and that the EFF was not a "hacker defense fund,"
despite what had appeared in print.    Kapor chatted
a bit about the basic motivations of his group,
emphasizing their good faith and willingness to
listen and seek common ground with law
enforcement -- when, er,  possible.

      Then, at Godwin's urging, Kapor suddenly
remarked that EFF's own Internet machine had
been "hacked" recently, and that EFF did not
consider this incident amusing.

     After this surprising confession, things began to
loosen up quite rapidly.  Soon Kapor was fielding
questions, parrying objections, challenging
definitions, and juggling paradigms with something
akin to his usual gusto.

     Kapor seemed to score quite an effect with his
shrewd and skeptical analysis of the merits of telco
"Caller-ID" services.  (On this topic, FCIC and EFF
have never been at loggerheads, and have no
particular established earthworks to defend.)
Caller-ID has generally been promoted as a privacy
service for consumers, a presentation Kapor
described as a "smokescreen,"  the real point of
Caller-ID being to *allow corporate customers to
build extensive commercial databases  on
everybody who phones or faxes them.*  Clearly, few
people in the room had considered this possibility,
except perhaps for two late-arrivals from  US WEST
RBOC security, who chuckled nervously.

     Mike Godwin then made an extensive
presentation on "Civil Liberties Implications of
Computer Searches and Seizures."  Now, at last, we
were getting to the real nitty-gritty here, real political
horse-trading.  The audience listened with close
attention, angry mutters rising occasionally:  "He's
trying to teach us our jobs!"  "We've been thinking
about this for years!  We think about these issues
every day!"  "If I didn't seize the works, I'd be sued by
the guy's victims!"   "I'm violating the law if I leave
ten thousand disks full of illegal *pirated software*
and *stolen codes!*"   "It's our job to make sure
people don't trash the Constitution -- we're the
*defenders*  of the Constitution!"  "We seize stuff
when we know it will be forfeited anyway as
restitution for the victim!"

     "If it's forfeitable, then don't get a search
warrant, get a forfeiture warrant,"  Godwin suggested
coolly.  He further remarked that most suspects in
computer crime don't *want*  to see their computers
vanish out the door, headed God knew where, for
who knows how long.  They might not mind a search,
even an extensive search, but they want their
machines searched on-site.

     "Are they gonna feed us?"  somebody asked
sourly.

     "How about if you take copies of the data?"
Godwin parried.

     "That'll never stand up in court."

     "Okay, you make copies, give *them*  the
copies, and take the originals."

     Hmmm.

     Godwin championed bulletin-board systems as
repositories of First Amendment protected free
speech.  He complained that federal computer-
crime training manuals gave boards a bad press,
suggesting that they are hotbeds of crime haunted
by pedophiles and crooks, whereas the vast majority
of the nation's thousands of boards are completely
innocuous, and nowhere near so romantically
suspicious.

       People who run boards violently resent it when
their systems are seized, and their dozens (or
hundreds) of users look on in abject horror.   Their
rights of free expression are cut short.  Their right to
associate with other people is infringed.  And their
privacy is violated as their private electronic mail
becomes police property.

     Not a soul spoke up to defend the practice of
seizing boards.   The issue passed in chastened
silence.   Legal principles aside -- (and those
principles cannot be settled without laws passed or
court precedents) -- seizing bulletin boards has
become public-relations poison for American
computer police.

     And anyway, it's not entirely necessary.  If you're
a cop, you can get 'most everything you need from a
pirate board, just by using an inside informant.
Plenty of vigilantes -- well, *concerned citizens* --
will inform police the moment they see a pirate
board hit their area  (and will tell the police all about
it, in such technical detail, actually, that you kinda
wish they'd shut up).   They will happily supply police
with extensive downloads or printouts.  It's
*impossible* to keep this fluid electronic
information out of the hands of police.

     Some people in the electronic community
become enraged at the prospect of cops
"monitoring" bulletin boards.   This does have
touchy aspects, as Secret Service people in
particular examine bulletin boards with some
regularity.    But to expect electronic police to be
deaf dumb and blind in regard to this particular
medium rather flies in the face of common sense.
Police watch television, listen to radio, read
newspapers and magazines; why should the new
medium of boards be different?   Cops can exercise
the same access to electronic information as
everybody else.   As we have seen, quite a few
computer police maintain *their own*  bulletin
boards, including anti-hacker "sting" boards, which
have generally proven quite effective.

     As a final clincher, their Mountie friends in
Canada (and colleagues in Ireland and Taiwan)
don't have First Amendment or American
constitutional restrictions, but they do have phone
lines, and can call any bulletin board in America
whenever they please.  The same technological
determinants that play into the hands of hackers,
phone phreaks and software pirates can play into
the hands of police.  "Technological determinants"
don't have *any*  human allegiances.  They're not
black or white, or Establishment or Underground, or
pro-or-anti anything.

     Godwin  complained at length about what he
called "the Clever Hobbyist hypothesis"  -- the
assumption that the "hacker" you're busting is
clearly a technical genius, and must therefore by
searched with extreme thoroughness.  So:  from the
law's point of view, why risk missing anything?  Take
the works.  Take the guy's computer.  Take his books.
Take his notebooks.  Take the electronic drafts of his
love letters. Take his Walkman.  Take his wife's
computer.  Take his dad's computer.  Take his kid
sister's computer.   Take his employer's computer.
Take his compact disks -- they *might* be CD-ROM
disks, cunningly disguised as pop music.  Take his
laser printer -- he might have hidden something
vital in the printer's 5meg of memory.  Take his
software manuals and hardware documentation.
Take his science-fiction novels and his simulation-
gaming books.  Take his Nintendo Game-Boy and
his Pac-Man arcade game.  Take his answering
machine, take his telephone out of the wall.  Take
anything remotely suspicious.

     Godwin pointed out that most "hackers" are not,
in fact, clever genius hobbyists.  Quite a few are
crooks and grifters who don't have much in the way
of technical sophistication; just some rule-of-thumb
rip-off techniques.  The same goes for most fifteen-
year-olds who've downloaded a code-scanning
program from a pirate board.   There's no real need
to seize everything in sight.  It doesn't require an
entire computer system and ten thousand disks to
prove a case in court.

     What if the computer is the instrumentality of a
crime? someone demanded.

     Godwin admitted quietly that the doctrine of
seizing the instrumentality of a crime was pretty well
established in the American legal system.

     The meeting broke up.  Godwin and Kapor had
to leave.  Kapor was testifying next morning before
the Massachusetts Department Of Public Utility,
about ISDN narrowband wide-area networking.

     As soon as they were gone, Thackeray seemed
elated.   She had taken a great risk with this.  Her
colleagues had not, in fact, torn Kapor and Godwin's
heads off.  She was very proud of them, and told
them so.

     "Did you hear what Godwin said about
*instrumentality of a crime?*"  she exulted, to
nobody in particular.  "Wow, that means *Mitch isn't
going to sue me.*"

                         #

     America's computer police are an interesting
group.  As a social phenomenon they are far more
interesting, and far more important, than teenage
phone phreaks and computer hackers.  First, they're
older and wiser; not dizzy hobbyists with leaky
morals, but  seasoned adult professionals with all the
responsibilities of public service.  And, unlike
hackers, they possess not merely *technical* power
alone, but heavy-duty legal and social authority.

     And, very interestingly, they are just as much at
sea in cyberspace as everyone else.  They are not
happy about this.  Police are authoritarian by nature,
and prefer to obey rules and precedents.   (Even
those police who secretly enjoy a fast ride in rough
territory will soberly disclaim any "cowboy" attitude.)
But in cyberspace there *are*  no rules and
precedents.  They are groundbreaking pioneers,
Cyberspace Rangers, whether they like it or not.

     In my opinion, any teenager enthralled by
computers, fascinated by the ins and outs of
computer security, and attracted by the lure of
specialized forms of knowledge and power, would do
well to forget all about "hacking" and set his (or her)
sights on becoming a fed.   Feds can trump hackers
at almost every single thing hackers do, including
gathering intelligence, undercover disguise,
trashing, phone-tapping,  building dossiers,
networking, and infiltrating computer systems --
*criminal* computer systems.   Secret Service agents
know more about phreaking, coding and carding
than most phreaks can find out in years, and when it
comes to viruses, break-ins, software bombs and
trojan horses, Feds have direct access to red-hot
confidential information that is only vague rumor in
the underground.

     And if it's an impressive public rep you're after,
there are few people in the world who can be so
chillingly impressive as a well-trained, well-armed
United States Secret Service agent.

      Of course, a few personal sacrifices are
necessary in order to obtain that power and
knowledge.  First, you'll have the galling discipline of
belonging to a large organization;  but the world of
computer crime is still so small, and so amazingly
fast-moving, that it will remain spectacularly fluid for
years to come.   The second sacrifice is that you'll
have to give up ripping people off.  This is not a great
loss.  Abstaining from the use of illegal drugs, also
necessary, will be a boon to your health.

     A career in computer security is not a bad
choice for a young man or woman today.  The field
will almost certainly expand drastically in years to
come.  If you are a teenager today, by the time you
become a professional, the pioneers you have read
about in this book will be the grand old men and
women of the field, swamped by their many
disciples and successors.   Of course, some of them,
like William P. Wood of the 1865 Secret Service,
may well be mangled in the whirring machinery of
legal controversy; but by the time you enter the
computer-crime field, it may have stabilized
somewhat, while remaining entertainingly
challenging.

     But you can't just have a badge.  You have to win
it.  First, there's the federal law enforcement
training.  And it's hard -- it's a challenge.  A real
challenge -- not for wimps and rodents.

     Every Secret Service agent must complete
gruelling courses at the Federal Law Enforcement
Training Center.  (In fact, Secret Service agents are
periodically re-trained during their entire careers.)

     In order to get a glimpse of what this might be
like, I myself travelled to FLETC.

                         #

     The Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
is a 1500-acre facility on Georgia's Atlantic coast.   It's
a milieu of marshgrass, seabirds,  damp, clinging
sea-breezes, palmettos, mosquitos, and bats.   Until
1974, it was a  Navy Air Base, and still features a
working runway, and some WWII vintage
blockhouses and officers' quarters.  The Center has
since benefitted by a forty-million-dollar retrofit, but
there's still enough forest and swamp on the facility
for the Border Patrol to put in tracking practice.

     As a town, "Glynco" scarcely exists.  The nearest
real town is Brunswick, a few miles down Highway 17,
where I stayed at the aptly named Marshview
Holiday Inn.   I had Sunday dinner at a seafood
restaurant called "Jinright's," where I feasted on
deep-fried alligator tail.  This local favorite was a
heaped basket of bite-sized chunks of white, tender,
almost fluffy reptile meat, steaming in a peppered
batter crust.  Alligator makes a culinary experience
that's hard to forget, especially when liberally basted
with homemade cocktail sauce from a Jinright
squeeze-bottle.

     The crowded clientele were tourists, fishermen,
local black folks in their Sunday best, and white
Georgian locals who all seemed to bear an uncanny
resemblance to Georgia humorist Lewis Grizzard.

     The 2,400 students from 75 federal agencies who
make up the FLETC population scarcely seem to
make a dent in the low-key local scene.   The
students look like tourists, and the teachers seem to
have taken on much of the relaxed air of the Deep
South.   My host was Mr. Carlton Fitzpatrick, the
Program Coordinator of the Financial Fraud
Institute.  Carlton Fitzpatrick is a mustached, sinewy,
well-tanned Alabama native somewhere near his
late forties, with a fondness for chewing tobacco,
powerful computers, and salty, down-home homilies.
We'd met before, at FCIC in Arizona.

     The Financial Fraud Institute is one of the nine
divisions at FLETC. Besides Financial Fraud, there's
Driver & Marine, Firearms, and Physical Training.
These are specialized pursuits.  There are also five
general training divisions:  Basic Training,
Operations, Enforcement Techniques, Legal
Division, and Behavioral Science.

     Somewhere in this curriculum is everything
necessary to turn green college graduates into
federal agents.  First they're given ID cards. Then
they get the rather miserable-looking blue coveralls
known as "smurf suits."  The trainees are assigned a
barracks and a cafeteria, and immediately set on
FLETC's bone-grinding physical training routine.
Besides the obligatory  daily jogging -- (the trainers
run up danger flags beside the track when the
humidity rises high enough to threaten heat stroke) -
- there's the Nautilus machines, the martial arts, the
survival skills....

     The eighteen federal agencies who maintain on-
site academies at FLETC employ a wide variety of
specialized law enforcement units, some of them
rather arcane.   There's Border Patrol, IRS Criminal
Investigation Division, Park Service, Fish and
Wildlife, Customs, Immigration, Secret Service and
the Treasury's uniformed subdivisions....  If you're a
federal cop and you don't work for the FBI, you train
at FLETC.   This includes people as apparently
obscure as the agents of the Railroad Retirement
Board Inspector General.  Or the Tennessee Valley
Authority Police, who are in fact federal police
officers, and can and do arrest criminals on the
federal property of the Tennessee Valley Authority.

     And then there are the computer-crime people.
All sorts, all backgrounds.  Mr. Fitzpatrick  is not
jealous of his specialized knowledge.   Cops all over,
in every branch of service, may feel a need to learn
what he can teach.   Backgrounds don't matter
much.  Fitzpatrick himself  was originally a Border
Patrol veteran, then became a Border Patrol
instructor at FLETC.  His Spanish is still fluent -- but
he found himself strangely fascinated when the first
computers showed up at the Training Center.
Fitzpatrick did have a background in electrical
engineering, and though he never considered
himself a computer hacker, he somehow found
himself writing useful little programs for this new
and promising gizmo.

     He began looking into the general subject of
computers and crime, reading Donn Parker's books
and articles, keeping an ear cocked for war stories,
useful insights from the field, the up-and-coming
people of the local computer-crime and high-
technology units....  Soon he got a reputation around
FLETC as the resident "computer expert," and that
reputation alone brought him more exposure, more
experience -- until one day he looked around, and
sure enough he *was*  a federal computer-crime
expert.

     In fact, this unassuming, genial man may be
*the*  federal computer-crime expert.   There are
plenty of very good computer people, and plenty of
very good federal investigators, but the area where
these worlds of expertise overlap is very slim.  And
Carlton Fitzpatrick has been right at the center of
that since 1985, the first year of the Colluquy, a group
which owes much to his influence.

     He seems quite at home in his modest,
acoustic-tiled office, with its Ansel Adams-style
Western photographic art, a gold-framed Senior
Instructor Certificate, and a towering bookcase
crammed with three-ring binders with ominous titles
such as *Datapro Reports on Information Security*
and *CFCA Telecom Security '90.*

      The phone rings every ten minutes; colleagues
show up at the door to chat about new developments
in locksmithing or to shake their heads over the
latest dismal developments in the BCCI global
banking scandal.

     Carlton Fitzpatrick is a fount of computer-crime
war-stories, related in an acerbic drawl.  He tells me
the colorful tale of a hacker caught in California
some years back.   He'd been raiding systems,
typing code without a detectable break, for twenty,
twenty-four, thirty-six hours straight.  Not just logged
on -- *typing.*   Investigators were baffled.  Nobody
could do that.  Didn't he have to go to the bathroom?
Was it some kind of automatic keyboard-whacking
device that could actually type code?

     A raid on the suspect's home revealed a
situation of astonishing squalor.  The hacker turned
out to be a Pakistani computer-science student who
had flunked out of a California university.  He'd
gone completely underground as an illegal
electronic immigrant,  and was selling stolen phone-
service to stay alive.  The place was not merely
messy and dirty, but in a state of psychotic disorder.
Powered by some weird mix of culture shock,
computer addiction, and amphetamines, the
suspect had in fact been sitting in front of his
computer for a day and a half straight, with snacks
and drugs at hand on the edge of his desk and a
chamber-pot under his chair.

     Word about stuff like this gets around in the
hacker-tracker community.

     Carlton Fitzpatrick takes me for a guided tour
by car around the FLETC grounds.   One of our first
sights is the biggest indoor firing range in the world.
There are federal trainees in there, Fitzpatrick
assures me politely, blasting away with a wide variety
of automatic weapons: Uzis, Glocks, AK-47s....   He's
willing to take me inside.   I tell him I'm sure that's
really interesting, but I'd rather see his computers.
Carlton Fitzpatrick seems quite surprised and
pleased.  I'm apparently the first journalist he's ever
seen who has turned down the shooting gallery in
favor of microchips.

     Our next stop is a favorite with touring
Congressmen:  the three-mile long FLETC driving
range.  Here trainees of the Driver & Marine
Division are taught high-speed pursuit skills, setting
and breaking road-blocks, diplomatic security
driving for VIP limousines....  A favorite FLETC
pastime is to strap a passing Senator into the
passenger seat beside a Driver & Marine trainer, hit
a hundred miles an hour, then take it right into "the
skid-pan," a section of greased track  where two tons
of Detroit iron can whip and spin like a hockey puck.

     Cars don't fare well at FLETC.   First they're
rifled again and again for search practice.  Then they
do  25,000 miles of high-speed pursuit training; they
get about seventy miles per set of steel-belted
radials.   Then it's off to the skid pan, where
sometimes they roll and tumble headlong in the
grease.   When they're sufficiently grease-stained,
dented, and creaky, they're sent to the roadblock
unit, where they're battered without pity.  And finally
then they're sacrificed to the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms, whose trainees learn the ins
and outs of car-bomb work by blowing them into
smoking wreckage.

     There's a railroad box-car on the FLETC
grounds, and a large grounded boat, and a propless
plane; all training-grounds for searches.   The plane
sits forlornly on a patch of weedy tarmac next to an
eerie blockhouse known as the "ninja compound,"
where anti-terrorism specialists practice hostage
rescues.  As I gaze on this creepy paragon of modern
low-intensity warfare, my nerves are jangled by a
sudden staccato outburst of automatic weapons fire,
somewhere in the woods to my right.  "Nine-
millimeter," Fitzpatrick judges calmly.

     Even the eldritch ninja compound pales
somewhat compared to the truly surreal area known
as "the raid-houses."   This is a street lined on both
sides with nondescript concrete-block houses with
flat pebbled roofs.  They were once officers' quarters.
Now they are training grounds.   The first one to our
left, Fitzpatrick tells me, has been specially adapted
for computer search-and-seizure practice.  Inside it
has been wired for video from top to bottom, with
eighteen pan-and-tilt remotely controlled
videocams mounted on walls and in corners.  Every
movement of the trainee agent is recorded live by
teachers, for later taped analysis.  Wasted
movements, hesitations, possibly lethal tactical
mistakes -- all are gone over in detail.

     Perhaps the weirdest single aspect of this
building is its front door, scarred and scuffed all
along the bottom, from the repeated impact, day
after day, of federal shoe-leather.

     Down at the far end of the row of raid-houses
some people are practicing a murder.   We drive by
slowly as some very young and rather nervous-
looking federal trainees interview a heavyset bald
man on the raid-house lawn.  Dealing with murder
takes a lot of practice; first you have to learn to
control your own instinctive disgust and panic,  then
you have to learn to control the reactions of a nerve-
shredded crowd of civilians, some of whom may
have just lost a loved one, some of whom may be
murderers -- quite possibly both at once.

     A dummy plays the corpse.  The roles of the
bereaved, the morbidly curious, and the homicidal
are played, for pay, by local Georgians:  waitresses,
musicians, most anybody who needs to moonlight
and can learn a script.   These people, some of whom
are FLETC regulars year after year, must surely have
one of the strangest jobs in the world.

     Something about the scene:  "normal" people in
a weird situation, standing around talking in bright
Georgia sunshine, unsuccessfully pretending that
something dreadful has gone on, while a dummy lies
inside on faked bloodstains....  While behind this
weird masquerade, like a nested set of Russian dolls,
are grim future realities of real death, real violence,
real murders of real people, that these young agents
will really investigate, many times during their
careers....  Over and over....  Will those anticipated
murders look like this, feel like this -- not as "real" as
these amateur actors are trying to make it seem, but
both as "real," and as numbingly unreal, as watching
fake people standing around on a fake lawn?
Something about this scene unhinges me.  It seems
nightmarish to me,  Kafkaesque.   I simply don't
know how to take it; my head is turned around; I
don't know whether to laugh, cry, or just shudder.

     When the tour is over, Carlton Fitzpatrick and I
talk about computers.  For the first time cyberspace
seems like quite a comfortable place.  It seems very
real to me suddenly, a place where I know what I'm
talking about, a place I'm used to.   It's real.  "Real."
Whatever.

     Carlton Fitzpatrick is the only person I've met in
cyberspace circles who is happy with his present
equipment.  He's got a 5 Meg RAM PC with a 112
meg hard disk; a 660 meg's on the way.  He's got a
Compaq 386 desktop, and a Zenith 386 laptop with
120 meg.  Down the hall is a NEC Multi-Sync 2A with
a CD-ROM drive and a 9600 baud modem with four
com-lines.  There's a training minicomputer, and a
10-meg local mini just for the Center, and a lab-full
of student PC clones and half-a-dozen Macs or so.
There's a Data General MV 2500 with 8 meg on
board and a 370 meg disk.

     Fitzpatrick plans to run a UNIX board on the
Data General when he's finished beta-testing the
software for it, which he wrote himself.  It'll have E-
mail features, massive files on all manner of
computer-crime and investigation procedures, and
will follow the computer-security specifics of the
Department of Defense "Orange Book."  He thinks
it will be the biggest BBS in the federal government.

      Will it have *Phrack* on it?  I ask wryly.

     Sure, he tells me.  *Phrack,* *TAP,*  *Computer
Underground Digest,* all that stuff.  With  proper
disclaimers, of course.

     I ask him if he plans to be the sysop.  Running a
system that size is very time-consuming, and
Fitzpatrick teaches two three-hour courses every
day.

     No, he says seriously,  FLETC has to get its
money worth out of the instructors.  He thinks he
can get a local volunteer to do it, a high-school
student.

     He says a bit more, something I think about an
Eagle Scout law-enforcement liaison program, but
my mind has rocketed off in disbelief.

     "You're going to put a *teenager* in charge of a
federal security BBS?"  I'm speechless.  It hasn't
escaped my notice that the FLETC Financial Fraud
Institute is the *ultimate* hacker-trashing target;
there is stuff in here, stuff of such utter and
consummate cool by every standard of the digital
underground.... I imagine the hackers of my
acquaintance, fainting dead-away from forbidden-
knowledge greed-fits, at the mere prospect of
cracking the superultra top-secret computers used
to train the Secret Service in computer-crime....

     "Uhm, Carlton," I babble, "I'm sure he's a really
nice kid and all, but that's a terrible temptation to
set in front of somebody who's, you know, into
computers and just starting out..."

     "Yeah," he says, "that did occur to me."  For the
first time I begin to suspect that he's pulling my leg.

     He seems proudest when he shows me an
ongoing project called JICC, Joint Intelligence
Control Council.  It's based on the services provided
by EPIC, the El Paso Intelligence Center, which
supplies data and intelligence to the Drug
Enforcement Administration, the Customs Service,
the Coast Guard, and the state police of the four
southern border states.  Certain EPIC files can now
be accessed by drug-enforcement police of Central
America, South America and the Caribbean, who
can also trade information among themselves.
Using a telecom program called "White Hat,"
written by two brothers named Lopez from the
Dominican Republic, police can now network
internationally on inexpensive PCs.   Carlton
Fitzpatrick is teaching a class of drug-war agents
from the Third World, and he's very proud of their
progress.   Perhaps soon the sophisticated
smuggling networks of the Medellin Cartel will be
matched by a sophisticated computer network of the
Medellin Cartel's sworn enemies.   They'll track
boats, track contraband, track the international
drug-lords who now leap over borders with great
ease, defeating the police through the clever use of
fragmented national jurisdictions.

     JICC and EPIC must remain beyond the scope
of this book.   They seem to me to be very large
topics fraught with complications that I am not fit to
judge.   I do know, however, that the international,
computer-assisted networking of police, across
national boundaries, is something that Carlton
Fitzpatrick considers very important, a harbinger of
a desirable future.  I also know that networks by their
nature ignore physical boundaries.  And I also know
that where you put communications you put a
community, and that when those communities
become self-aware they will fight to preserve
themselves and to expand their influence.   I make
no judgements whether this is good or bad.  It's just
cyberspace; it's just the way things are.

     I asked Carlton Fitzpatrick what advice he
would have for a twenty-year-old who wanted to
shine someday in the world of electronic law
enforcement.

     He told me that the number one rule was
simply not to be scared of computers.   You don't
need to be an obsessive "computer weenie," but you
mustn't be buffaloed just because some machine
looks fancy.  The advantages computers give smart
crooks are matched by the advantages they give
smart cops.  Cops in the future will have to enforce
the law "with their heads, not their holsters."   Today
you can make good cases without ever leaving your
office.  In the future, cops who resist the computer
revolution will never get far beyond walking a beat.

     I asked Carlton Fitzpatrick if he had some single
message for the public; some single thing that he
would most like the American public to know about
his work.

     He thought about it while.  "Yes," he said finally.
"*Tell* me the rules, and I'll *teach* those rules!"  He
looked me straight in the eye.  "I do the best that I
can."


        PART FOUR:  THE CIVIL LIBERTARIANS


     The story of the Hacker Crackdown, as we have
followed it thus far, has been technological, subcultural,
criminal and legal.  The story of the Civil Libertarians,
though it partakes of all those other aspects, is profoundly
and thoroughly *political.*

      In 1990, the obscure, long-simmering struggle over
the ownership and nature of cyberspace became loudly
and irretrievably public.  People from some of the oddest
corners of American society suddenly found themselves
public figures.   Some of these people found this situation
much more than they had ever bargained for.  They
backpedalled, and tried to retreat back to the mandarin
obscurity of their cozy subcultural niches.   This was
generally to prove a mistake.

     But the civil libertarians seized the day in 1990.
They
found themselves organizing, propagandizing, podium-
pounding, persuading, touring, negotiating, posing for
publicity photos, submitting to interviews, squinting in the
limelight as they tried a tentative, but growingly
sophisticated, buck-and-wing upon the public stage.

     It's not hard to see why the civil libertarians should
have this competitive advantage.

     The  hackers  of the digital underground are an
hermetic elite.  They find it hard to make any remotely
convincing case for their actions in front of the general
public.   Actually, hackers roundly despise the "ignorant"
public, and have never trusted the judgement of "the
system."  Hackers do propagandize, but only among
themselves, mostly in giddy, badly spelled manifestos of
class warfare, youth rebellion or naive techie utopianism.
Hackers must strut and boast in order to establish and
preserve their underground reputations.  But if they speak
out too loudly and publicly, they will break the fragile
surface-tension of the underground, and they will be
harrassed or arrested.   Over the longer term, most
hackers stumble, get busted, get betrayed, or simply give
up.   As a political force, the digital underground is
hamstrung.

     The telcos, for their part, are an ivory tower under
protracted seige.  They have plenty of money with which to
push their calculated public image, but they waste much
energy and goodwill attacking one another with
slanderous and demeaning ad campaigns.   The telcos
have suffered at the hands of politicians, and, like hackers,
they don't trust the public's judgement.  And this distrust
may be well-founded.  Should the general public of the
high-tech 1990s come to understand its own best interests
in telecommunications, that might well pose a grave
threat to the specialized technical power and authority
that the telcos have relished for over a century.   The
telcos do have strong advantages: loyal employees, specialized
expertise,  influence in the halls of power, tactical allies
in law enforcement, and unbelievably vast amounts of
money.  But politically speaking, they lack genuine
grassroots support; they simply don't seem to have many
friends.

     Cops know a lot of things other people don't know.
But cops willingly reveal only those aspects of their
knowledge that they feel will meet their institutional
purposes and further public order.   Cops have respect,
they have responsibilities, they have power in the streets
and even power in the home, but cops don't do
particularly well in limelight.   When pressed, they will
step out in the public gaze to threaten bad-guys, or to
cajole prominent citizens, or perhaps to sternly lecture the
naive and misguided.   But then they go back within their
time-honored fortress of the station-house, the courtroom
and the rule-book.

     The electronic civil libertarians, however, have
proven to be born political animals.   They seemed to
grasp very early on the postmodern truism that
communication is power.   Publicity is power.  Soundbites
are power.  The ability to shove one's issue onto the public
agenda -- and *keep it there* -- is power.  Fame is power.
Simple personal fluency and eloquence can be power, if
you can somehow catch the public's eye and ear.

     The civil libertarians had no monopoly on "technical
power" -- though they all owned computers, most were not
particularly advanced computer experts.  They had a good
deal of money, but nowhere near the earthshaking wealth
and the galaxy of resources possessed by telcos or federal
agencies.   They had no ability to arrest people.   They
carried out no phreak and hacker covert dirty-tricks.

     But they really knew how to network.

     Unlike the other groups in this book, the civil
libertarians have operated very much in the open, more or
less right in the public hurly-burly.  They have lectured
audiences galore and talked to countless journalists, and
have learned to refine their spiels.   They've kept the
cameras clicking, kept those faxes humming, swapped
that email, run those photocopiers on overtime, licked
envelopes and spent small fortunes on airfare and long-
distance.  In an information society, this open, overt,
obvious activity has proven to be a profound advantage.

     In 1990, the civil libertarians of cyberspace
assembled out of nowhere in particular, at warp speed.
This "group" (actually, a networking gaggle of interested
parties which scarcely deserves even that loose term)  has
almost nothing in the way of formal organization.   Those
formal civil libertarian organizations which did take an
interest in cyberspace issues, mainly the Computer
Professionals for Social Responsibility and the American
Civil Liberties Union, were carried along by events in 1990,
and acted mostly as adjuncts, underwriters or launching-
pads.

     The civil libertarians nevertheless enjoyed the
greatest success of any of the groups in the Crackdown of
1990.  At this writing, their future looks rosy and the
political initiative is firmly in their hands.   This should
be kept in mind as we study the highly unlikely lives and
lifestyles of the people who actually made this happen.

                    #

     In June 1989, Apple Computer, Inc., of Cupertino,
California, had a problem.   Someone had illicitly copied a
small piece of Apple's proprietary software, software which
controlled an internal chip driving the Macintosh screen
display.   This Color QuickDraw source code was a closely
guarded piece of Apple's intellectual property.  Only
trusted Apple insiders were supposed to possess it.

     But the "NuPrometheus League" wanted things
otherwise.  This person (or persons) made several illicit
copies of this source code, perhaps as many as two dozen.
He (or she, or they)  then put those illicit floppy disks
into envelopes and mailed them to people all over America:
people in the computer industry who were associated with,
but not directly employed by, Apple Computer.

     The NuPrometheus caper was a complex, highly
ideological, and very hacker-like crime.  Prometheus, it
will be recalled, stole the fire of the Gods and gave this
potent gift to the general ranks of downtrodden mankind.
A similar god-in-the-manger attitude was implied for the
corporate elite of Apple Computer, while the "Nu"
Prometheus had himself cast in the role of rebel demigod.
The illicitly copied data was given away for free.

     The  new Prometheus, whoever he was, escaped the
fate of the ancient Greek Prometheus, who was chained to
a rock for centuries by the vengeful gods while an eagle
tore and ate his liver.   On the other hand, NuPrometheus
chickened out somewhat by comparison with his role
model.  The small chunk of Color QuickDraw code he had
filched and replicated was more or less useless to Apple's
industrial rivals (or, in fact, to anyone else).   Instead
of giving fire to mankind, it was more as if NuPrometheus
had photocopied the schematics for part of a Bic lighter.
The act was not a genuine work of industrial espionage.  It
was best interpreted as a symbolic, deliberate slap in the
face for the Apple corporate heirarchy.

     Apple's internal struggles were well-known in the
industry.  Apple's founders, Jobs and Wozniak, had both
taken their leave long since.  Their raucous core of senior
employees had been a barnstorming crew of 1960s
Californians, many of them markedly less than happy with
the new button-down multimillion dollar regime at Apple.
Many of the programmers and developers who had
invented the Macintosh model in the early 1980s had also
taken their leave of the company.  It was they, not the
current masters of Apple's corporate fate, who had
invented the stolen Color QuickDraw code.  The
NuPrometheus stunt was well-calculated to wound
company morale.

     Apple called the FBI.  The Bureau takes an interest in
high-profile intellectual-property theft cases, industrial
espionage and theft of trade secrets.   These were likely
the right people to call, and rumor has it that the entities
responsible were in fact discovered by the FBI, and then
quietly squelched by Apple management.  NuPrometheus
was never publicly charged with a crime, or prosecuted, or
jailed.  But there were no further illicit releases of
Macintosh internal software.  Eventually the painful issue
of NuPrometheus was allowed to fade.

     In the meantime, however, a large number of puzzled
bystanders found themselves entertaining surprise guests
from the FBI.

     One of these people was John Perry Barlow.    Barlow
is a most unusual man, difficult to describe in
conventional terms.   He is perhaps best known as a
songwriter for the Grateful Dead, for he composed lyrics
for "Hell in a Bucket,"  "Picasso Moon,"  "Mexicali Blues,"
"I Need a Miracle," and many more; he has been writing
for the band since 1970.

     Before we tackle the vexing question as to why a rock
lyricist should be interviewed by the FBI in a computer-
crime case, it might be well to say a word or two about the
Grateful Dead.   The Grateful Dead are perhaps the most
successful and long-lasting of the numerous cultural
emanations from the Haight-Ashbury district of San
Francisco, in the glory days of Movement politics and
lysergic transcendance.   The Grateful Dead are a nexus, a
veritable whirlwind, of  applique decals, psychedelic vans,
tie-dyed T-shirts, earth-color denim, frenzied dancing and
open and unashamed drug use.  The symbols, and the
realities, of Californian freak power surround the Grateful
Dead like knotted macrame.

     The Grateful Dead and their thousands of Deadhead
devotees are radical Bohemians.   This much is widely
understood.   Exactly what this implies in the 1990s is
rather more problematic.

     The Grateful Dead are among the world's most
popular and wealthy entertainers: number 20,  according
to *Forbes* magazine, right between M.C. Hammer and
Sean Connery.  In 1990, this jeans-clad group of purported
raffish outcasts earned seventeen million dollars.  They
have been earning sums much along this line for quite
some time now.

     And while the Dead are not investment bankers or
three-piece-suit tax specialists -- they are, in point of
fact,
hippie musicians -- this money has not been squandered
in senseless Bohemian excess.   The Dead have been
quietly active for many years, funding various worthy
activities in their  extensive and widespread cultural
community.

     The Grateful Dead are not conventional players in
the American power establishment.  They nevertheless
are something of a force to be reckoned with.  They have a
lot of money and a lot of friends in many places, both
likely and unlikely.

     The Dead may be known for back-to-the-earth
environmentalist rhetoric, but this hardly makes them
anti-technological Luddites.  On the contrary, like most
rock musicians, the Grateful Dead have spent their entire
adult lives in the company of complex electronic
equipment.  They have funds to burn on any sophisticated
tool and toy that might happen to catch their fancy.   And
their fancy is quite extensive.

     The Deadhead community boasts any number of
recording engineers, lighting experts, rock video mavens,
electronic technicians of all descriptions.  And the drift
goes both ways.  Steve Wozniak, Apple's co-founder, used
to throw rock festivals.   Silicon Valley rocks out.

     These are the 1990s, not the 1960s.  Today, for a
surprising number of people all over America, the
supposed dividing line between Bohemian and technician
simply no longer exists.  People of this sort may have a set
of windchimes and a dog with a knotted kerchief 'round its
neck, but they're also quite likely to own a multimegabyte
Macintosh running MIDI synthesizer software and trippy
fractal simulations.   These days, even Timothy Leary
himself, prophet of LSD, does virtual-reality computer-
graphics demos in his lecture tours.

     John Perry Barlow is not a member of the Grateful
Dead.  He is, however, a ranking Deadhead.

     Barlow describes himself as a "techno-crank."   A
vague term like "social activist" might not be far from the
mark, either.  But Barlow might be better described as a
"poet" -- if one keeps in mind  Percy Shelley's archaic
definition of poets as "unacknowledged legislators of the
world."

     Barlow once made a stab at acknowledged legislator
status.  In 1987, he narrowly missed the Republican
nomination for a seat in the Wyoming State Senate.
Barlow is a Wyoming native, the third-generation scion of
a well-to-do cattle-ranching family.   He is in his early
forties, married and the father of three daughters.

     Barlow is not much troubled by other people's narrow
notions of consistency.  In the late 1980s, this Republican
rock lyricist cattle rancher sold his ranch and became a
computer telecommunications devotee.

     The free-spirited Barlow made this transition with
ease.  He genuinely enjoyed computers.   With a beep of
his modem, he leapt from small-town Pinedale, Wyoming,
into electronic contact with a large and lively crowd of
bright, inventive, technological sophisticates from all over
the world.   Barlow found the social milieu of computing
attractive: its fast-lane pace, its blue-sky rhetoric, its
open-
endedness.   Barlow began dabbling in computer
journalism, with marked success, as he was a quick study,
and both shrewd and eloquent.  He frequently travelled to
San Francisco to network with Deadhead friends.  There
Barlow made extensive contacts throughout the
Californian computer community, including friendships
among the wilder spirits at Apple.

     In May 1990, Barlow received a visit from a local
Wyoming agent of the FBI.  The NuPrometheus case had
reached Wyoming.

     Barlow was troubled to find himself under
investigation in an area of his interests once quite free of
federal attention.   He had to struggle to explain the very
nature of computer-crime to a headscratching local FBI
man who specialized in cattle-rustling.   Barlow, chatting
helpfully and demonstrating the wonders of his modem to
the puzzled fed, was alarmed to find all "hackers"
generally under FBI suspicion as an evil influence in the
electronic community.   The FBI, in pursuit of a hacker
called "NuPrometheus," were tracing attendees of a
suspect group called the Hackers Conference.

     The Hackers Conference, which had been started in
1984,  was a yearly Californian meeting of digital pioneers
and enthusiasts.  The hackers of the Hackers Conference
had little if anything to do with the hackers of the digital
underground.   On the contrary, the hackers of this
conference were mostly well-to-do Californian high-tech
CEOs, consultants, journalists and entrepreneurs.   (This
group of hackers were the exact sort of "hackers" most
likely to react with militant fury at any criminal
degradation of the term "hacker.")

     Barlow, though he was not arrested or accused of a
crime, and though his computer had certainly not gone
out the door, was very troubled by this anomaly.  He
carried the word to the Well.

      Like the Hackers Conference,  "the Well" was an
emanation of the Point Foundation.   Point Foundation,
the inspiration of a wealthy Californian 60s radical named
Stewart Brand, was to be a major launch-pad of the civil
libertarian effort.

     Point Foundation's cultural efforts, like those of
their
fellow Bay Area Californians the Grateful Dead, were
multifaceted and multitudinous.  Rigid ideological
consistency had never been a strong suit of the *Whole
Earth Catalog.*   This Point publication had enjoyed a
strong vogue during the late 60s and early 70s, when it
offered hundreds of practical (and not so practical) tips on
communitarian living, environmentalism, and getting
back-to-the-land.   The *Whole Earth Catalog,* and its
sequels, sold two and half million copies and won a
National Book Award.

     With the slow collapse of American radical dissent,
the *Whole Earth Catalog* had slipped to a more modest
corner of the cultural radar; but in its magazine
incarnation, *CoEvolution Quarterly,*  the Point
Foundation continued to offer a magpie potpourri of
"access to tools and ideas."

     *CoEvolution Quarterly,*  which started in 1974, was
never a widely popular magazine.  Despite periodic
outbreaks of millenarian fervor, *CoEvolution Quarterly*
failed to revolutionize Western civilization and replace
leaden centuries of history with bright new Californian
paradigms.  Instead, this propaganda arm of Point
Foundation cakewalked a fine line between impressive
brilliance and New Age flakiness.  *CoEvolution
Quarterly*  carried no advertising, cost a lot, and came out
on cheap newsprint with modest black-and-white
graphics.  It was poorly distributed, and spread mostly by
subscription and word of mouth.

     It could not seem to grow beyond 30,000 subscribers.
And yet -- it never seemed to shrink much, either.  Year in,
year out, decade in, decade out, some strange
demographic minority accreted to support the magazine.
The enthusiastic readership did not seem to have much in
the way of coherent politics or  ideals.  It was sometimes
hard to understand what held them together (if the often
bitter debate in the letter-columns could be described as
"togetherness").

     But if the magazine did not flourish, it was resilient;
it
got by.  Then, in 1984, the birth-year of the Macintosh
computer, *CoEvolution Quarterly* suddenly hit the
rapids.  Point Foundation had discovered the computer
revolution.  Out came the *Whole Earth Software Catalog*
of 1984,  arousing headscratching doubts among the tie-
dyed faithful, and rabid enthusiasm among the nascent
"cyberpunk" milieu, present company included.  Point
Foundation started its yearly Hackers Conference, and
began to take an extensive interest in the strange new
possibilities of digital counterculture.  *CoEvolution
Quarterly* folded its teepee, replaced by *Whole Earth
Software Review*  and eventually by *Whole Earth
Review*  (the magazine's present incarnation, currently
under the editorship of virtual-reality maven Howard
Rheingold).

     1985 saw the birth of the "WELL" -- the "Whole Earth
'Lectronic Link."  The Well was Point Foundation's
bulletin board system.

     As boards went, the Well was an anomaly from the
beginning, and remained one.   It was local to San
Francisco.  It was huge, with multiple phonelines and
enormous files of commentary.  Its complex UNIX-based
software might be most charitably described as "user-
opaque."  It was run on a mainframe out of the rambling
offices of a non-profit cultural foundation in Sausalito.
And it was crammed with fans of the Grateful Dead.

     Though the Well was peopled by chattering hipsters
of the Bay Area counterculture, it was by no means a
"digital underground" board.   Teenagers were fairly
scarce; most Well users (known as "Wellbeings") were
thirty- and forty-something Baby Boomers.   They tended
to work in the information industry: hardware, software,
telecommunications, media, entertainment.  Librarians,
academics, and journalists were especially common on
the Well, attracted by Point Foundation's open-handed
distribution of "tools and ideas."

     There were no anarchy files on the Well, scarcely a
dropped hint about access codes or credit-card theft.   No
one used handles.  Vicious "flame-wars" were held to a
comparatively civilized rumble.   Debates were sometimes
sharp, but no Wellbeing ever claimed that a rival had
disconnected his phone, trashed his house, or posted his
credit card numbers.

     The Well grew slowly as the 1980s advanced.  It
charged a modest sum for access and storage, and lost
money for years -- but not enough to hamper the Point
Foundation, which was nonprofit anyway.   By 1990, the
Well had about five thousand users.  These users
wandered about a gigantic cyberspace smorgasbord of
"Conferences", each conference itself consisting of a
welter of "topics," each topic containing dozens,
sometimes hundreds of comments, in a tumbling,
multiperson debate that could last for months or years on
end.

     In 1991, the Well's list of conferences looked like
this:

                      CONFERENCES ON THE WELL

                    WELL "Screenzine" Digest    (g zine)

                    Best of the WELL - vintage material -
(g best)

 Index listing of new topics in all conferences -  (g
newtops)

                        Business - Education
                       ----------------------

Apple Library Users Group(g alug)      Agriculture  (g agri)
Brainstorming          (g brain)             Classifieds
(g cla)
Computer Journalism    (g cj)  Consultants       (g consult)
Consumers              (g cons)                Design
(g design)
Desktop Publishing     (g desk)  Disability        (g
disability)
Education              (g ed)                Energy
(g energy91)
Entrepreneurs   (g entre)               Homeowners        (g
home)
Indexing        (g indexing)     Investments       (g
invest)
Kids91                 (g kids)                    Legal
(g legal)
One Person Business    (g one)
Periodical/newsletter(g per)
Telecomm Law           (g tcl)               The Future
(g fut)
Translators            (g trans)               Travel
(g tra)
Work                   (g work)

                Electronic Frontier Foundation    (g eff)
                Computers, Freedom & Privacy      (g cfp)
  Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility  (g cpsr)

                   Social - Political - Humanities
                  ---------------------------------

Aging                  (g gray)                      AIDS
(g aids)
Amnesty International  (g amnesty)     Archives          (g
arc)
Berkeley               (g berk)     Buddhist          (g
wonderland)
Christian              (g cross)                  Couples
(g couples)
Current Events         (g curr)        Dreams            (g
dream)
Drugs                  (g dru)                       East
Coast        (g east)
Emotional Health****   (g private)      Erotica           (g
eros)
Environment            (g env)     Firearms          (g
firearms)
First Amendment (g first)    Fringes of Reason (g fringes)
Gay                    (g gay)              Gay (Private)#
(g gaypriv)
Geography              (g geo)             German
(g german)
Gulf War               (g gulf)                    Hawaii
(g aloha)
Health                 (g heal)                     History
(g hist)
Holistic               (g holi)
Interview         (g inter)
Italian                (g ital)                      Jewish
(g jew)
Liberty                (g liberty)                Mind
(g mind)
Miscellaneous          (g misc) Men on the WELL** (g mow)
Network Integration    (g origin)         Nonprofits
(g non)
North Bay              (g north)                 Northwest
(g nw)
Pacific Rim            (g pacrim)             Parenting
(g par)
Peace                  (g pea)                     Peninsula
(g pen)
Poetry                 (g poetry)                Philosophy
(g phi)
Politics               (g pol)
Psychology        (g psy)
Psychotherapy   (g therapy)  Recovery##        (g recovery)
San Francisco          (g sanfran)           Scams
(g scam)
Sexuality              (g sex)                    Singles
(g singles)
Southern               (g south)                Spanish
(g spanish)
Spirituality           (g spirit)               Tibet
(g tibet)
Transportation  (g transport)      True Confessions  (g tru)
Unclear (g unclear)   WELL Writer's Workshop***(g www)
Whole Earth (g we)           Women on the WELL*(g wow)
Words                  (g words)                 Writers
(g wri)

**** Private Conference - mail wooly for entry
***Private conference - mail sonia for entry
** Private conference - mail flash for entry
*  Private conference - mail reva for entry
#  Private Conference - mail hudu for entry
## Private Conference - mail dhawk for entry

                  Arts - Recreation - Entertainment
                  -----------------------------------
ArtCom Electronic Net  (g acen)
Audio-Videophilia (g aud)
Bicycles               (g bike)                  Bay Area
Tonight**(g bat)
Boating                (g wet)                  Books
(g books)
CD's                   (g cd)                        Comics
(g comics)
Cooking                (g cook)                 Flying
(g flying)
Fun                    (g fun)                     Games
(g games)
Gardening              (g gard)               Kids
(g kids)
Nightowls*             (g owl)              Jokes
(g jokes)
MIDI                   (g midi)                   Movies
(g movies)
Motorcycling           (g ride)              Motoring
(g car)
Music                  (g mus)                  On Stage
(g onstage)
Pets                   (g pets)                  Radio
(g rad)
Restaurant             (g rest)              Science Fiction
(g sf)
Sports                 (g spo)                  Star Trek
(g trek)
Television             (g tv)                  Theater
(g theater)
Weird                  (g weird)
Zines/Factsheet Five(g f5)
* Open from midnight to 6am
** Updated daily

                             Grateful Dead
                             -------------
Grateful Dead          (g gd)          Deadplan*         (g
dp)
Deadlit                (g deadlit)       Feedback
(g feedback)
GD Hour                (g gdh)            Tapes
(g tapes)
Tickets                (g tix)              Tours
(g tours)

* Private conference - mail tnf for entry

                               Computers
                              -----------
AI/Forth/Realtime      (g realtime)    Amiga             (g
amiga)
Apple                  (g app)       Computer Books    (g
cbook)
Art & Graphics         (g gra)                Hacking
(g hack)
HyperCard              (g hype)                IBM PC
(g ibm)
LANs                   (g lan)                      Laptop
(g lap)
Macintosh              (g mac)    Mactech           (g
mactech)
Microtimes   (g microx)            Muchomedia        (g
mucho)
NeXt                   (g next)                     OS/2
(g os2)
Printers               (g print)
Programmer's Net  (g net)
Siggraph               (g siggraph)           Software
Design   (g sdc)
Software/Programming (software)
Software Support  (g ssc)
Unix                   (g unix)                     Windows
(g windows)
Word Processing        (g word)

                        Technical - Communications
                       ----------------------------
Bioinfo                (g bioinfo)           Info
(g boing)
Media                  (g media)             NAPLPS
(g naplps)
Netweaver              (g netweaver)   Networld (g 