lmination of both human and mechanical
failure."   (This time, however, AT&T offered no discount
on later calls.  Unkind critics suggested that AT&T were
worried about setting any precedent for refunding the
financial losses caused by telephone crashes.)

     Industry journals asked  publicly if AT&T was "asleep
at the switch."   The telephone network, America's
purported marvel of high-tech reliability,  had gone down
three times in 18 months.  *Fortune* magazine listed the
Crash of September 17 among the "Biggest Business
Goofs of 1991,"  cruelly parodying AT&T's ad campaign in
an article entitled "AT&T Wants You Back (Safely On the
Ground, God Willing)."

     Why had those New York switching systems simply
run out of power?  Because no human being had attended
to the alarm system.  Why did the alarm systems blare
automatically, without any human being noticing?
Because the three telco technicians who *should* have
been listening were absent from their stations in the
power-room, on another floor of the building -- attending a
training class.  A training class about the alarm systems
for
the power room!

     "Crashing the System" was no longer
"unprecedented" by late 1991.   On the contrary, it no
longer even seemed an oddity.   By 1991, it was clear that
all the policemen in the world could no longer "protect"
the phone system from crashes.   By far the worst crashes
the system had ever had, had been inflicted, by the
system, upon *itself.*  And this time nobody was making
cocksure statements that this was an anomaly, something
that would never happen again.   By 1991 the System's
defenders had met their nebulous Enemy, and the Enemy
was -- the System.


        PART TWO:  THE DIGITAL UNDERGROUND


     The date was May 9, 1990.  The Pope was touring
Mexico City.   Hustlers from the Medellin Cartel were
trying to buy black-market Stinger missiles in Florida.  On
the comics page, Doonesbury character Andy was dying of
AIDS.   And then.... a highly unusual item whose novelty
and calculated rhetoric won it headscratching attention in
newspapers all over America.

     The US Attorney's office in Phoenix, Arizona, had
issued a press release announcing a nationwide law
enforcement crackdown against "illegal computer hacking
activities."  The sweep was officially known as "Operation
Sundevil."

     Eight paragraphs in the press release gave the bare
facts:  twenty-seven search warrants carried out on May 8,
with three arrests, and a hundred and fifty agents on the
prowl in "twelve" cities across America.   (Different counts
in local press reports yielded "thirteen," "fourteen," and
"sixteen" cities.)   Officials estimated that criminal
losses
of revenue to telephone companies "may run into millions
of dollars."   Credit for the Sundevil investigations was
taken by the US Secret Service, Assistant US Attorney Tim
Holtzen of Phoenix, and the Assistant Attorney General of
Arizona,  Gail Thackeray.

       The prepared remarks of Garry M. Jenkins,
appearing in a U.S. Department of Justice press release,
were of particular interest.  Mr. Jenkins was the Assistant
Director of the US Secret Service, and the highest-ranking
federal official to take any direct public role in  the
hacker
crackdown of 1990.

      "Today, the Secret Service is sending a clear message
to those computer hackers who have decided to violate
the laws of this nation in the mistaken belief that they can
successfully avoid detection by hiding behind the relative
anonymity of their computer terminals.(...)
     "Underground groups have been formed for the
purpose of exchanging information relevant to their
criminal activities.  These groups often communicate with
each other through message systems between computers
called 'bulletin boards.'
     "Our experience shows that many computer hacker
suspects are no longer misguided teenagers,
mischievously playing games with their computers in their
bedrooms.  Some are now high tech computer operators
using computers to engage in unlawful conduct."

     Who were these "underground groups" and "high-
tech operators?"  Where had they come from?  What did
they want?  Who *were*   they?  Were they
"mischievous?"  Were they dangerous?  How had
"misguided teenagers" managed to alarm the United
States Secret Service?  And just how widespread was this
sort of thing?

     Of all the major players in the Hacker Crackdown:
the phone companies, law enforcement, the civil
libertarians, and the "hackers" themselves -- the "hackers"
are by far the most mysterious, by far the hardest to
understand, by far the *weirdest.*

      Not only are "hackers"  novel in their activities, but
they come in a variety of odd subcultures, with a variety of
languages, motives and values.

     The earliest proto-hackers were probably those
unsung mischievous telegraph boys who were summarily
fired by the Bell Company in 1878.

     Legitimate "hackers," those computer enthusiasts
who are independent-minded but law-abiding, generally
trace their spiritual ancestry to  elite technical
universities,
especially M.I.T. and Stanford, in the 1960s.

     But the genuine roots of the modern hacker
*underground* can probably be traced most successfully
to a now much-obscured hippie anarchist movement
known as the Yippies.   The  Yippies, who took their name
from the largely fictional "Youth International Party,"
carried out a loud and lively policy of surrealistic
subversion and outrageous political mischief.  Their basic
tenets were flagrant sexual promiscuity, open and copious
drug use, the political overthrow of any powermonger over
thirty years of age, and an immediate end to the war in
Vietnam, by any means necessary, including the psychic
levitation of the Pentagon.

     The two most visible Yippies were Abbie Hoffman
and Jerry Rubin.  Rubin eventually  became a Wall Street
broker.  Hoffman, ardently sought by federal authorities,
went into hiding for seven years, in Mexico, France, and
the United States.   While on the lam, Hoffman continued
to write and publish, with help from sympathizers in the
American anarcho-leftist underground.   Mostly, Hoffman
survived through false ID and odd jobs.  Eventually he
underwent facial plastic surgery and adopted an entirely
new identity as one "Barry Freed."   After surrendering
himself to authorities in 1980, Hoffman  spent a year in
prison on a cocaine conviction.

     Hoffman's worldview grew much darker as the glory
days of the 1960s faded.  In 1989, he purportedly
committed suicide, under odd and, to some, rather
suspicious circumstances.

     Abbie Hoffman is said to have caused the Federal
Bureau of Investigation to amass the single largest
investigation file ever opened on an individual American
citizen.  (If this is true, it is still questionable whether
the
FBI regarded Abbie Hoffman a serious public threat  --
quite possibly, his file was enormous simply because
Hoffman left colorful legendry wherever he went).   He
was a gifted publicist, who regarded electronic media as
both playground and weapon.  He actively enjoyed
manipulating network TV and other gullible, image-
hungry media,  with various weird lies, mindboggling
rumors, impersonation scams, and other sinister
distortions, all absolutely guaranteed to upset cops,
Presidential candidates, and federal judges.    Hoffman's
most famous work was a book self-reflexively known as
*Steal This Book,* which publicized a number of methods
by which young, penniless hippie agitators might live off
the fat of a system supported by humorless drones.  *Steal
This Book,* whose title urged readers to damage the very
means of distribution which had put it into their hands,
might be described as a spiritual ancestor of a computer
virus.

     Hoffman, like many a later conspirator, made
extensive use of pay-phones for his agitation work -- in his
case, generally through the use of cheap brass washers as
coin-slugs.

     During the Vietnam War, there was a federal surtax
imposed on telephone service; Hoffman and his cohorts
could, and did,  argue that in systematically stealing
phone service they were engaging in civil disobedience:
virtuously denying tax funds to an illegal and immoral war.

      But this thin veil of decency was soon dropped
entirely.  Ripping-off the System  found its own
justification in deep alienation and a basic outlaw
contempt for  conventional bourgeois values.  Ingenious,
vaguely politicized varieties of rip-off, which might be
described as "anarchy by convenience," became very
popular in Yippie circles, and because rip-off was so
useful, it was to survive the Yippie movement itself.

     In the early 1970s, it required fairly limited
expertise
and ingenuity to cheat payphones, to divert "free"
electricity and gas service, or to rob vending machines and
parking meters for handy pocket change.   It also required
a conspiracy to spread this knowledge, and the gall and
nerve actually to commit petty theft, but the Yippies had
these qualifications in plenty.  In June 1971, Abbie
Hoffman and a telephone enthusiast sarcastically known
as "Al Bell"  began publishing a newsletter called *Youth
International Party Line.*  This newsletter was dedicated
to collating and spreading Yippie rip-off techniques,
especially of phones, to the joy of the freewheeling
underground and the insensate rage of all straight people.

     As a political tactic, phone-service theft ensured that
Yippie advocates would always have ready access to the
long-distance telephone as a medium, despite the Yippies'
chronic lack of organization, discipline, money, or even a
steady home address.

     *Party Line* was run out of Greenwich Village for a
couple of years, then "Al Bell" more or less defected from
the faltering ranks of Yippiedom, changing the
newsletter's name to *TAP* or *Technical Assistance
Program.*  After the Vietnam War ended, the steam
began leaking rapidly out of American radical dissent.
But  by this time, "Bell" and his dozen or so core
contributors  had the bit between their teeth, and had
begun to derive tremendous gut-level satisfaction from
the sensation of pure *technical power.*

     *TAP* articles, once highly politicized, became
pitilessly jargonized and technical, in homage or parody to
the Bell System's own technical documents, which *TAP*
studied closely, gutted, and reproduced without
permission.   The *TAP* elite revelled in gloating
possession of the specialized knowledge necessary to beat
the system.

        "Al Bell" dropped out of the game by the late 70s,
and "Tom Edison" took over; TAP  readers (some 1400 of
them, all told) now began to show more interest in telex
switches and the growing phenomenon of computer
systems.

     In 1983, "Tom Edison" had his computer stolen and
his house set on fire by an arsonist.  This was an
eventually
mortal blow to *TAP* (though the legendary name was to
be resurrected in 1990 by a young Kentuckian computer-
outlaw named "Predat0r.")

                         #


     Ever since telephones began to make money, there
have been people willing to rob and defraud phone
companies.   The legions of petty phone thieves vastly
outnumber those "phone phreaks" who  "explore the
system" for the sake of the intellectual challenge.   The
New York metropolitan area  (long in the vanguard of
American crime) claims over 150,000 physical attacks on
pay telephones every year!  Studied carefully, a modern
payphone reveals itself as a little fortress, carefully
designed and redesigned over generations,  to resist coin-
slugs, zaps of electricity, chunks of coin-shaped ice,
prybars, magnets, lockpicks, blasting caps.  Public pay-
phones must survive in a world of unfriendly, greedy
people,  and a modern payphone is as exquisitely evolved
as a cactus.

     Because the phone network pre-dates the computer
network, the scofflaws known as "phone phreaks" pre-date
the scofflaws known as "computer hackers."   In practice,
today, the line between "phreaking" and "hacking" is very
blurred, just as the distinction between telephones and
computers has blurred.  The phone system has been
digitized, and computers have learned to "talk" over
phone-lines.   What's worse -- and this was the point of the
Mr. Jenkins of the Secret Service -- some hackers have
learned to steal, and some thieves have learned to hack.

     Despite the blurring, one can still draw a few useful
behavioral distinctions between "phreaks" and "hackers."
Hackers are intensely interested in the "system" per se,
and enjoy relating to machines.  "Phreaks" are more
social,  manipulating the system in a rough-and-ready
fashion in order to get through to other human beings,
fast, cheap and under the table.

     Phone phreaks love nothing so much as "bridges,"
illegal conference calls of ten or twelve chatting
conspirators, seaboard to seaboard, lasting for many hours
-- and running, of course, on somebody else's tab,
preferably a large corporation's.

     As phone-phreak conferences wear on, people drop
out (or simply leave the phone off the hook, while they
sashay off to work or school or babysitting), and new
people are phoned up and invited to join in, from some
other continent, if possible.  Technical trivia, boasts,
brags,
lies, head-trip deceptions, weird rumors, and cruel gossip
are all freely exchanged.

     The lowest rung of phone-phreaking is the theft of
telephone access codes.   Charging a phone call to
somebody else's stolen number is, of course, a pig-easy
way of stealing phone service, requiring practically no
technical expertise.  This practice has been very
widespread, especially among lonely people without much
money who are far from home.  Code theft has flourished
especially in college dorms, military bases, and,
notoriously, among roadies for rock bands.   Of late, code
theft has spread very rapidly among Third Worlders in the
US, who pile up enormous unpaid long-distance bills to
the Caribbean, South America, and Pakistan.

     The simplest way to steal phone-codes is simply to
look over a victim's shoulder as he punches-in his own
code-number on a public payphone.  This technique is
known as "shoulder-surfing," and is especially common in
airports, bus terminals, and train stations.  The code is
then sold by the thief for a few dollars.  The buyer abusing
the code has no computer expertise, but calls his Mom in
New York,  Kingston or Caracas and runs up a huge bill
with impunity.  The losses from this primitive phreaking
activity are far, far greater than the monetary losses
caused by computer-intruding hackers.

     In the mid-to-late 1980s, until the introduction of
sterner telco security measures, *computerized* code
theft worked like a charm, and was virtually omnipresent
throughout the digital underground, among phreaks and
hackers alike.   This was accomplished through
programming one's computer to try random code
numbers over the telephone until one of them worked.
Simple programs to do this were widely available in the
underground; a computer running all night was likely to
come up with a dozen or so useful hits.  This could be
repeated week after week until one had a large library of
stolen codes.

     Nowadays, the computerized dialling of hundreds of
numbers can be detected within hours and swiftly traced.
If a stolen code is repeatedly abused, this too can be
detected within a few hours.  But for years in the 1980s,
the
publication of stolen codes was a kind of elementary
etiquette for fledgling hackers.   The simplest way to
establish your bona-fides as a raider was to steal a code
through repeated random dialling and offer it to the
"community" for use.   Codes could be both stolen, and
used, simply and easily from the safety of one's own
bedroom, with very little fear of detection or punishment.

     Before computers and their phone-line modems
entered American homes in gigantic numbers, phone
phreaks had their own special telecommunications
hardware gadget, the famous "blue box."  This fraud
device (now rendered increasingly useless by the digital
evolution of the phone system) could trick switching
systems into granting free access to long-distance lines.
It
did this by mimicking the system's own signal, a tone of
2600 hertz.

     Steven Jobs and Steve Wozniak, the founders of
Apple Computer, Inc., once dabbled in selling blue-boxes
in college dorms in California.  For many, in the early days
of phreaking, blue-boxing was scarcely perceived as
"theft," but rather as a fun (if sneaky) way to use excess
phone capacity harmlessly.  After all, the long-distance
lines were *just sitting there*....   Whom did it hurt,
really?
If you're not *damaging* the system, and  you're not
*using up any tangible resource,* and if nobody *finds
out* what you did, then what real harm have you done?
What exactly *have* you "stolen," anyway?   If a tree falls
in the forest and nobody hears it, how much is the noise
worth?  Even now this remains a rather dicey question.

     Blue-boxing was no joke to the phone companies,
however.  Indeed, when *Ramparts* magazine, a radical
publication in California, printed the wiring schematics
necessary to create a  mute box in June 1972, the
magazine was seized by police and Pacific Bell phone-
company officials.   The mute box, a blue-box variant,
allowed its user to receive long-distance calls free of
charge to the caller.  This device was closely described in
a
*Ramparts* article wryly titled "Regulating the Phone
Company In Your Home."  Publication of this article was
held to be in violation of Californian State Penal Code
section 502.7, which outlaws ownership of wire-fraud
devices and the selling of "plans or instructions for any
instrument, apparatus, or device intended to avoid
telephone toll charges."

     Issues of *Ramparts* were recalled or seized on the
newsstands, and the resultant loss of income helped put
the magazine out of business.  This was an ominous
precedent for free-expression issues, but the telco's
crushing of a radical-fringe magazine passed without
serious challenge at the time.  Even in the freewheeling
California 1970s, it was widely felt that there was
something sacrosanct about what the phone company
knew; that the telco had a legal and moral right to protect
itself by shutting off the flow of such illicit information.
Most telco information was so "specialized" that it would
scarcely be understood by any honest member of the
public.   If not published, it would not be missed.   To
print
such material did not seem part of the legitimate role of a
free press.

     In 1990 there would be a similar telco-inspired attack
on the electronic phreak/hacking "magazine" *Phrack.*
The *Phrack* legal case became a central issue in the
Hacker Crackdown, and gave rise to great controversy.
*Phrack* would also be shut down, for a  time, at least, but
this time both the telcos and their law-enforcement allies
would pay a much larger price for their actions.  The
*Phrack* case will be examined in detail, later.

     Phone-phreaking as a social practice is still very
much alive at this moment.  Today, phone-phreaking is
thriving much more vigorously than the better-known and
worse-feared practice of "computer hacking."  New forms
of phreaking are spreading rapidly, following new
vulnerabilities in sophisticated phone services.

     Cellular phones are especially vulnerable; their chips
can be re-programmed to present a false caller ID and
avoid billing.   Doing so also avoids police tapping, making
cellular-phone abuse a favorite among drug-dealers.
"Call-sell operations" using pirate cellular phones can, and
have, been run right out of the backs of cars, which move
from "cell" to "cell" in the local phone system, retailing
stolen long-distance service, like some kind of demented
electronic version of the neighborhood ice-cream truck.

      Private branch-exchange phone systems in large
corporations can be penetrated; phreaks dial-up a local
company, enter its internal phone-system, hack it, then
use the company's own PBX system to dial back out over
the public network, causing the company to be stuck with
the resulting long-distance bill.  This technique is known
as "diverting."  "Diverting"  can be very costly, especially
because phreaks tend to travel in packs and never stop
talking.   Perhaps the worst by-product of this "PBX fraud"
is that victim companies and telcos have sued one another
over the financial responsibility for the stolen calls, thus
enriching not only shabby phreaks but well-paid lawyers.

        "Voice-mail systems" can also be abused; phreaks
can seize their own sections of these sophisticated
electronic answering machines, and use them for trading
codes or knowledge of illegal techniques.   Voice-mail
abuse does not hurt the company directly, but finding
supposedly empty slots in your company's answering
machine all crammed with phreaks eagerly chattering
and hey-duding one another in impenetrable jargon can
cause sensations of almost mystical repulsion and dread.

        Worse yet, phreaks have sometimes been known to
react truculently to attempts to "clean up" the voice-mail
system.  Rather than humbly acquiescing to being thrown
out of their playground, they may very well call up the
company officials at work (or at home) and loudly demand
free voice-mail addresses of their very own.  Such bullying
is taken very seriously by spooked victims.

     Acts of phreak revenge against straight people are
rare, but voice-mail systems are especially tempting and
vulnerable, and an infestation of angry phreaks in one's
voice-mail system is no joke.  They can erase legitimate
messages; or spy on private messages; or harass users with
recorded taunts and  obscenities.   They've even been
known to seize control of voice-mail security, and lock out
legitimate users, or even shut down the system entirely.

     Cellular phone-calls, cordless phones, and ship-to-
shore telephony can all be monitored by various forms of
radio; this kind of "passive monitoring" is spreading
explosively today.  Technically eavesdropping on other
people's cordless and cellular phone-calls is the fastest-
growing area in phreaking today.   This practice strongly
appeals to the lust for power and conveys gratifying
sensations of technical superiority over the eavesdropping
victim.  Monitoring is rife with all manner of tempting evil
mischief.  Simple prurient snooping is by far the most
common activity.   But credit-card numbers unwarily
spoken over the phone can be recorded, stolen and used.
And tapping people's phone-calls (whether through active
telephone taps or passive radio monitors) does lend itself
conveniently to activities like blackmail, industrial
espionage, and political dirty tricks.

     It should be repeated that telecommunications
fraud,  the theft of phone service,  causes vastly greater
monetary losses than the practice of entering into
computers by stealth.   Hackers are mostly young
suburban American white males, and exist in their
hundreds -- but "phreaks" come from both sexes and from
many nationalities, ages and ethnic backgrounds, and are
flourishing in the thousands.

                         #

     The term "hacker" has had an unfortunate history.
This book, *The Hacker Crackdown,* has little to say about
"hacking" in its finer, original sense.  The term  can
signify
the free-wheeling intellectual exploration of the highest
and deepest potential of computer systems.   Hacking can
describe  the determination to make access to computers
and information as free and open as possible.  Hacking
can involve the heartfelt conviction that beauty can be
found in computers, that the fine aesthetic in a perfect
program can liberate the mind and spirit.  This is
"hacking" as it was defined in Steven Levy's much-praised
history of the pioneer computer milieu, *Hackers,*
published in 1984.

     Hackers of all kinds are absolutely soaked through
with heroic anti-bureaucratic sentiment.  Hackers long for
recognition as a praiseworthy cultural archetype, the
postmodern electronic equivalent of the cowboy and
mountain man.   Whether  they deserve such a reputation
is something for history to decide.  But many hackers --
including those outlaw hackers who are computer
intruders, and whose activities are defined as criminal --
actually attempt to *live up to* this techno-cowboy
reputation.   And given that electronics and
telecommunications are still largely unexplored
territories, there is simply *no telling* what hackers might
uncover.

     For some people, this freedom is the very breath of
oxygen, the inventive spontaneity that makes life worth
living  and that flings open doors to marvellous possibility
and individual empowerment.  But for many people -- and
increasingly so -- the hacker is an ominous figure, a smart-
aleck sociopath ready to burst out of his basement
wilderness and savage other people's lives for his own
anarchical convenience.

     Any form of power without responsibility, without
direct and formal checks and balances, is frightening to
people -- and reasonably so.  It should be frankly admitted
that hackers *are* frightening, and that the basis of this
fear is not irrational.

     Fear of hackers goes well beyond the fear of merely
criminal activity.

     Subversion and manipulation of the phone system is
an act with disturbing political overtones.  In America,
computers and telephones are potent symbols of
organized authority and the technocratic business elite.

     But there is an element in American culture that has
always strongly rebelled  against these symbols; rebelled
against all large industrial computers and all phone
companies.    A certain anarchical tinge deep in the
American soul delights in causing confusion and pain to
all bureaucracies, including technological ones.

     There is sometimes malice and vandalism in this
attitude, but it is a deep and cherished part of the
American national character.  The outlaw, the rebel, the
rugged individual, the pioneer, the sturdy Jeffersonian
yeoman, the private citizen resisting interference in his
pursuit of happiness --  these are figures that all
Americans recognize, and that many will strongly applaud
and defend.

     Many scrupulously law-abiding citizens today do
cutting-edge work with electronics -- work that has already
had tremendous social influence and will have much
more in years to come.    In all truth, these talented,
hardworking, law-abiding, mature, adult people are far
more disturbing  to the peace and order of the current
status quo  than any scofflaw group of romantic teenage
punk kids.  These law-abiding hackers  have the power,
ability, and willingness to influence other people's lives
quite unpredictably.  They have means, motive, and
opportunity to meddle drastically with the American social
order.    When corralled into governments, universities, or
large multinational companies, and forced to follow
rulebooks and wear suits and ties, they at least have some
conventional halters on their freedom of action.  But when
loosed alone, or in small groups, and fired by imagination
and the entrepreneurial spirit, they can move mountains -
- causing landslides that will likely crash directly into
your
office and living room.

     These people, as a class, instinctively recognize that
a
public, politicized attack on hackers will eventually spread
to them -- that the term "hacker,"  once demonized, might
be used to knock their hands off the levers of power and
choke them out of existence.  There are hackers today who
fiercely and publicly resist any besmirching of the noble
title of hacker.   Naturally and understandably, they
deeply resent the attack on their values implicit in using
the word "hacker" as a synonym for computer-criminal.

     This book, sadly but in my opinion unavoidably,
rather adds to the degradation of the term.  It concerns
itself mostly with "hacking" in its commonest latter-day
definition, i.e., intruding into computer systems by stealth
and without permission.

     The term "hacking" is used routinely today  by
almost all law enforcement officials with any professional
interest in computer fraud  and abuse.   American police
describe almost any crime committed with, by, through, or
against a computer as hacking.

     Most importantly, "hacker" is what computer-
intruders choose to call *themselves.*  Nobody who
"hacks" into systems willingly describes himself (rarely,
herself) as a "computer intruder," "computer trespasser,"
"cracker," "wormer," "darkside hacker" or "high tech street
gangster."   Several other demeaning terms have been
invented  in the hope that the press and public will leave
the original sense of the word alone.   But few people
actually use these terms.  (I exempt the term "cyberpunk,"
which a few hackers and law enforcement people actually
do use.  The term "cyberpunk" is drawn from literary
criticism and has some odd  and unlikely resonances, but,
like hacker, cyberpunk too has become a criminal
pejorative today.)

     In any case, breaking into computer systems was
hardly alien to the original hacker tradition.   The first
tottering systems of the 1960s  required fairly extensive
internal surgery merely to function day-by-day.   Their
users "invaded" the deepest, most arcane recesses of their
operating software almost as a matter of routine.
"Computer security" in these early, primitive systems was
at best an afterthought.  What security there was, was
entirely physical, for it was assumed that anyone allowed
near this expensive, arcane hardware would be a fully
qualified professional expert.

     In a campus environment, though, this meant that
grad students, teaching assistants, undergraduates, and
eventually, all manner of dropouts and hangers-on ended
up accessing and often running the works.

     Universities, even modern universities, are not in the
business of maintaining security over information.  On the
contrary, universities, as institutions, pre-date the
"information economy" by many centuries and are not-
for-profit cultural entities, whose reason for existence
(purportedly) is to discover truth, codify it through
techniques of scholarship, and then teach it.   Universities
are meant to *pass the torch of civilization,* not just
download data into student skulls, and the values of the
academic community are strongly at odds with those of all
would-be information empires.   Teachers at all levels,
from kindergarten up, have proven to be shameless and
persistent software and data pirates.   Universities do not
merely "leak information" but vigorously broadcast free
thought.

     This clash of values has been fraught with
controversy.  Many hackers of the 1960s remember their
professional apprenticeship as a long guerilla war against
the uptight mainframe-computer "information
priesthood."  These computer-hungry youngsters had to
struggle hard for access to computing power, and many of
them were not above certain, er, shortcuts.   But, over the
years,  this practice freed computing from the sterile
reserve of lab-coated technocrats and was largely
responsible for the explosive growth of computing in
general society -- especially *personal* computing.

       Access to technical power acted like catnip on
certain of these youngsters.  Most of the basic techniques
of computer intrusion: password cracking, trapdoors,
backdoors, trojan horses --  were invented in college
environments in the 1960s, in the early days of network
computing.   Some off-the-cuff experience at computer
intrusion was to be in the informal resume of most
"hackers" and many future industry giants.   Outside of the
tiny cult of computer enthusiasts, few people thought
much about  the implications of "breaking into"
computers.  This sort of activity had not yet been
publicized, much less criminalized.

     In the 1960s, definitions of "property" and "privacy"
had not yet been extended to cyberspace.  Computers
were not yet indispensable to society.  There were no vast
databanks of vulnerable, proprietary information stored in
computers, which might be accessed, copied without
permission, erased, altered, or sabotaged.   The stakes
were low in the early days -- but they grew every year,
exponentially, as computers themselves grew.

     By the 1990s, commercial and political pressures had
become overwhelming, and they broke the social
boundaries of the hacking subculture.   Hacking had
become too important to be left to the  hackers.   Society
was now forced to tackle the intangible nature of
cyberspace-as-property, cyberspace as privately-owned
unreal-estate.   In the  new, severe, responsible, high-
stakes context of the "Information Society" of the 1990s,
"hacking" was called into question.

     What did it mean to break into a computer without
permission and use its computational power, or look
around inside its files without hurting anything?  What
were computer-intruding hackers, anyway -- how should
society, and the law,  best define their actions?    Were
they just *browsers,* harmless intellectual explorers?
Were they *voyeurs,* snoops, invaders of privacy?  Should
they be sternly treated as potential *agents of espionage,*
or perhaps as *industrial spies?* Or were they best
defined as *trespassers,* a very common teenage
misdemeanor?  Was hacking  *theft of service?*  (After
all, intruders were getting someone else's computer to
carry out their orders, without permission and without
paying).   Was hacking *fraud?*  Maybe it was best
described as *impersonation.*  The commonest mode of
computer intrusion was (and is) to swipe or snoop
somebody else's password, and then enter the computer
in the guise of another person -- who is commonly stuck
with the blame and the bills.

     Perhaps a medical metaphor was better -- hackers
should be defined as "sick," as *computer addicts* unable
to control their irresponsible, compulsive behavior.

     But these weighty assessments meant little to the
people who were actually being judged.   From inside the
underground world of hacking itself,  all these perceptions
seem quaint, wrongheaded, stupid, or meaningless.   The
most important self-perception of underground hackers --
from the 1960s, right through to the present day --  is that
they are an *elite.*  The day-to-day struggle in the
underground is not over sociological definitions -- who
cares? -- but for power, knowledge, and  status among
one's peers.

     When you are a hacker, it is your own inner
conviction of your elite status that enables you to break,
or
let us say "transcend," the rules.   It is not that *all*
rules go
by the board.   The rules habitually broken  by hackers are
*unimportant* rules -- the rules of dopey greedhead telco
bureaucrats and pig-ignorant government pests.

     Hackers have their *own* rules,  which separate
behavior which is cool and elite, from behavior which is
rodentlike, stupid and losing.   These "rules," however, are
mostly unwritten and  enforced by peer pressure and
tribal feeling.   Like all rules that depend on the unspoken
conviction that everybody else is a good old boy, these
rules are ripe for abuse.  The mechanisms of hacker peer-
pressure, "teletrials" and ostracism, are rarely used and
rarely work.  Back-stabbing slander, threats, and
electronic harassment are also freely employed in down-
and-dirty intrahacker feuds, but this rarely forces a rival
out of the scene entirely.  The only real solution for the
problem of an utterly losing, treacherous and rodentlike
hacker is to *turn him in to the police.*   Unlike the Mafia
or Medellin Cartel, the hacker elite cannot simply execute
the bigmouths, creeps and troublemakers among their
ranks, so they turn one another in with astonishing
frequency.

     There is no tradition of silence or *omerta* in the
hacker underworld.     Hackers can be shy, even reclusive,
but when they do talk, hackers tend to brag, boast and
strut.   Almost everything hackers do is *invisible;* if
they
don't brag, boast, and strut about it, then *nobody will
ever
know.*  If you don't have something to brag, boast, and
strut about, then nobody in the underground will
recognize you and favor you with vital cooperation and
respect.

     The way to win a solid reputation in the underground
is by telling other hackers things that could only have
been learned by exceptional cunning and stealth.
Forbidden knowledge, therefore, is the basic currency of
the digital underground, like seashells among Trobriand
Islanders.   Hackers hoard this knowledge, and dwell upon
it obsessively, and refine it, and bargain with it, and talk
and talk about it.

     Many hackers even suffer from a strange obsession
to *teach* -- to spread the ethos and the knowledge of the
digital underground.  They'll do this even when it gains
them no particular advantage and presents a grave
personal risk.

      And when that risk catches up with them, they will go
right on teaching and preaching -- to a new audience this
time, their interrogators from law enforcement.   Almost
every hacker arrested tells everything he knows --  all
about his friends, his mentors, his disciples -- legends,
threats, horror stories, dire rumors, gossip,
hallucinations.
This is, of course, convenient for law enforcement -- except
when law enforcement begins to believe hacker legendry.

     Phone phreaks are unique among criminals in their
willingness to call up law enforcement officials -- in the
office, at their homes -- and give them an extended piece
of their mind.  It is hard not to interpret this as *begging
for arrest,* and in fact it is an act of incredible
foolhardiness.  Police are naturally nettled by these acts
of
chutzpah and will go well out of their way to bust these
flaunting idiots.   But it can also be interpreted as a
product of a world-view so elitist, so closed and hermetic,
that electronic police are simply  not perceived as
"police,"
but rather as *enemy phone phreaks* who should be
scolded into behaving "decently."

     Hackers at their most grandiloquent perceive
themselves as the elite pioneers of a new electronic world.
Attempts to make them obey the democratically
established laws of contemporary American society are
seen as repression and persecution.   After all, they argue,
if Alexander Graham Bell had gone along with the rules of
the Western Union telegraph company, there would have
been no telephones.  If Jobs and Wozniak had believed
that IBM was the be-all and end-all, there would have
been no personal computers.  If Benjamin Franklin and
Thomas Jefferson had tried to "work within the system"
there would have been no United States.

     Not only do hackers privately believe this as an
article of faith, but they have been known to write ardent
manifestos about it.  Here are some revealing excerpts
from an especially vivid hacker manifesto:  "The Techno-
Revolution" by  "Dr. Crash,"  which appeared in electronic
form in *Phrack* Volume 1, Issue 6, Phile 3.


     "To fully explain the true motives behind hacking, we
must first take a quick look into the past.  In the 1960s, a
group of MIT students built the first modern computer
system.  This wild, rebellious group of young men were the
first to bear the name 'hackers.'  The systems that they
developed were intended to be used to solve world
problems and to benefit all of mankind.
     "As we can see, this has not been the case.  The
computer system has been solely in the hands of big
businesses and the government.  The wonderful device
meant to enrich life has become a weapon which
dehumanizes people.  To the government and large
businesses, people are no more than disk space, and the
government doesn't use computers to arrange aid for the
poor, but to control nuclear death weapons.  The average
American can only have access to a small microcomputer
which is worth only a fraction of what they pay for it.  The
businesses keep the true state-of-the-art equipment away
from the people behind a steel wall of incredibly high
prices and bureaucracy.  It is because of this state of
affairs that hacking was born.(...)
     "Of course, the government doesn't want the
monopoly of technology broken, so they have outlawed
hacking and arrest anyone who is caught.(...) The phone
company is another example of technology abused and
kept from people with high prices.(...)
     "Hackers often find that their existing equipment,
due to the monopoly tactics of computer companies, is
inefficient for their purposes.  Due to the exorbitantly
high
prices, it is impossible to legally purchase the necessary
equipment.  This need has given still another segment of
the fight:  Credit Carding.  Carding is a way of obtaining
the necessary goods without paying for them.  It is again
due to the companies' stupidity that Carding is so easy,
and shows that the world's businesses are in the hands of
those with considerably less technical know-how than we,
the hackers. (...)
     "Hacking must continue.  We must train newcomers
to the art of hacking.(....)  And whatever you do, continue
the fight.  Whether you know it or not, if you are a hacker,
you are a revolutionary.  Don't worry, you're on the right
side."

     The  defense of "carding" is rare.  Most hackers
regard credit-card theft as "poison" to the underground, a
sleazy and immoral effort that, worse yet, is hard to get
away with.   Nevertheless, manifestos advocating credit-
card theft, the deliberate crashing of computer systems,
and even acts of violent physical destruction such as
vandalism and arson do exist in the underground.  These
boasts and threats are taken quite seriously by the police.
And not every hacker is an abstract, Platonic computer-
nerd.  Some few are quite experienced at picking locks,
robbing phone-trucks, and breaking and entering
buildings.

     Hackers  vary in their degree of hatred for authority
and the violence of their rhetoric.  But, at a bottom line,
they are scofflaws.  They don't regard the current rules of
electronic behavior as respectable efforts to preserve law
and order and protect public safety.  They regard these
laws as immoral efforts by soulless corporations to protect
their profit margins and to crush dissidents.   "Stupid"
people, including police, businessmen, politicians, and
journalists, simply have no right to judge the actions of
those possessed of genius, techno-revolutionary
intentions, and technical expertise.

                    #

     Hackers are generally teenagers and college kids not
engaged in earning a living.   They often come from fairly
well-to-do middle-class backgrounds, and are markedly
anti-materialistic (except, that is, when it comes to
computer equipment).   Anyone motivated by greed for
mere money (as opposed to the greed for power,
knowledge and status)  is swiftly written-off as a narrow-
minded breadhead whose interests can only be corrupt
and contemptible.   Having grown up in the 1970s and
1980s, the young Bohemians of the digital underground
regard straight society as awash in plutocratic corruption,
where everyone from the President down is for sale and
whoever has the gold makes the rules.

     Interestingly, there's a funhouse-mirror image of this
attitude on the other side of the conflict.  The police are
also one of the most markedly anti-materialistic groups in
American society, motivated not by mere money but by
ideals of service, justice, esprit-de-corps, and, of course,
their own brand of specialized knowledge and power.
Remarkably, the propaganda war between cops and
hackers has always involved angry allegations that the
other side is trying to make a sleazy buck.  Hackers
consistently sneer that anti-phreak prosecutors are
angling for cushy jobs as telco lawyers and that computer-
crime police are aiming to cash in later as well-paid
computer-security consultants in the private sector.

     For their part, police publicly conflate all hacking
crimes with robbing payphones with crowbars.  Allegations
of "monetary losses" from computer intrusion are
notoriously inflated.  The act of illicitly copying a
document from a computer is morally equated with
directly robbing a company of, say, half a million dollars.
The teenage computer intruder in possession of this
"proprietary"  document has certainly not sold it for such a
sum, would likely have little idea how to sell it at all,
and
quite probably doesn't even understand what he has.  He
has not made a cent in profit from his felony but is still
morally equated with a thief who has robbed the church
poorbox and lit out for Brazil.

     Police want to believe that all hackers are thieves.
It
is a tortuous and almost unbearable act for the American
justice system to put people in jail because they want to
learn things which are forbidden for them to know.   In an
American context, almost any pretext for punishment is
better than jailing people to protect certain restricted
kinds of information.  Nevertheless, *policing
information* is part and parcel of the struggle against
hackers.

     This dilemma is well exemplified by the remarkable
activities of "Emmanuel Goldstein," editor and publisher
of a print magazine known as *2600: The Hacker
Quarterly.*  Goldstein was an English major at Long
Island's State University of New York in the '70s, when he
became involved with the local college radio station.  His
growing interest in electronics caused him to drift into
Yippie *TAP* circles and thus into the digital
underground, where he became a self-described techno-
rat.  His magazine publishes techniques of computer
intrusion and telephone "exploration" as well as gloating
exposes of telco misdeeds and governmental failings.

     Goldstein lives quietly and very privately in a large,
crumbling Victorian mansion in Setauket, New York.   The
seaside house is decorated with telco decals, chunks of
driftwood, and the basic bric-a-brac of a hippie crash-pad.
He is unmarried, mildly unkempt, and survives mostly on
TV dinners and turkey-stuffing eaten straight out of the
bag.   Goldstein is a man of considerable charm and
fluency, with a brief, disarming smile and the kind of
pitiless, stubborn, thoroughly recidivist integrity that
America's electronic police find genuinely alarming.

     Goldstein took his nom-de-plume, or "handle," from a
character in Orwell's *1984,*  which may be taken,
correctly, as a symptom of the gravity of his sociopolitical
worldview.   He is not himself a practicing computer
intruder, though he vigorously abets these actions,
especially when they are pursued against large
corporations or governmental agencies.   Nor is he a thief,
for he loudly scorns mere theft of phone service, in favor
of
'exploring and manipulating the system.'  He is probably
best described and understood as a *dissident.*

      Weirdly, Goldstein is living in modern America
under conditions very similar to those of former East
European intellectual dissidents.  In other words, he
flagrantly espouses a value-system that is deeply and
irrevocably opposed to the system of those in power and
the police.  The values in *2600* are generally expressed in
terms that are ironic, sarcastic, paradoxical, or just
downright confused.  But there's no mistaking their
radically anti-authoritarian tenor.  *2600* holds that
technical power and specialized knowledge, of any kind
obtainable, belong by right in the hands of those
individuals brave and bold enough to discover them -- by
whatever means necessary.  Devices, laws, or systems that
forbid access, and the free spread of knowledge, are
provocations that any free and self-respecting hacker
should relentlessly attack.  The "privacy" of governments,
corporations and other soulless technocratic organizations
should never be protected at the expense of the liberty
and free initiative of the individual techno-rat.

     However, in our contemporary workaday world,  both
governments and corporations are very anxious indeed to
police information which is secret, proprietary, restricted,
confidential, copyrighted, patented, hazardous, illegal,
unethical, embarrassing, or otherwise sensitive.   This
makes Goldstein persona non grata, and his philosophy a
threat.

     Very little about the conditions of Goldstein's daily
life would astonish, say, Vaclav Havel.  (We may note in
passing that President Havel once had his word-processor
confiscated by the Czechoslovak police.)   Goldstein lives
by *samizdat,* acting semi-openly as a data-center for the
underground, while challenging the powers-that-be to
abide by their own stated rules:  freedom of speech and
the First Amendment.

     Goldstein thoroughly looks and acts the part of
techno-rat, with shoulder-length ringlets and a piratical
black fisherman's-cap set at a rakish angle.  He often
shows up like Banquo's ghost at meetings of computer
professionals, where he listens quietly, half-smiling and
taking thorough notes.

     Computer professionals generally meet publicly,  and
find it very difficult to rid themselves of Goldstein and
his
ilk  without extralegal and unconstitutional actions.
Sympathizers, many of them quite respectable people
with responsible jobs, admire Goldstein's attitude and
surreptitiously pass him information.  An unknown but
presumably large proportion of Goldstein's  2,000-plus
readership are telco security personnel and police, who
are forced to subscribe to *2600*  to stay abreast of new
developments in hacking.  They thus find themselves
*paying this guy's rent* while grinding their teeth in
anguish, a situation that would have delighted Abbie
Hoffman (one of Goldstein's few idols).

     Goldstein is probably the best-known public
representative of the hacker underground today, and
certainly the best-hated.  Police regard him as a Fagin, a
corrupter of youth, and speak of him with untempered
loathing.  He is quite an accomplished gadfly.

     After the  Martin Luther King Day Crash of 1990,
Goldstein, for instance, adeptly rubbed salt into the wound
in the pages of *2600.*   "Yeah, it was fun for the phone
phreaks as we watched the network crumble," he admitted
cheerfully.   "But it was also an ominous sign of what's to
come...  Some AT&T people, aided by well-meaning but
ignorant media, were spreading the notion that many
companies had the same software and therefore could
face the same problem someday.  Wrong.  This was
entirely an AT&T software deficiency.  Of course, other
companies could face entirely *different* software
problems.  But then, so too could AT&T."

     After a technical discussion of the system's failings,
the Long Island techno-rat went on to offer thoughtful
criticism to the gigantic multinational's hundreds of
professionally qualified engineers.  "What we don't know
is how a major force in communications like AT&T could
be so sloppy.  What happened to backups?  Sure,
computer systems go down all the time, but people
making phone calls are not the same as people logging on
to computers.  We must make that distinction.  It's not
acceptable for the phone system or any other essential
service to 'go down.'  If we continue to trust technology
without understanding it, we can look forward to many
variations on this theme.
     "AT&T owes it to its customers to be prepared to
*instantly* switch to another network if something strange
and unpredictable starts occurring.  The news here isn't so
much the failure of a computer program, but the failure of
AT&T's entire structure."

     The very idea of this.... this *person*....  offering
"advice" about "AT&T's entire structure" is more than
some people can easily bear.   How dare this near-criminal
dictate what is or isn't "acceptable" behavior from AT&T?
Especially when he's publishing, in the very same issue,
detailed schematic diagrams for creating various
switching-network signalling tones unavailable to the
public.

      "See what happens when you drop a 'silver box' tone
or two down your local exchange or through different long
distance service carriers," advises *2600* contributor "Mr.
Upsetter" in "How To Build a Signal Box."  "If you
experiment systematically and keep good records, you will
surely discover something interesting."

     This is, of course, the scientific method, generally
regarded as a praiseworthy activity and one of the flowers
of modern civilization.   One can indeed learn a great deal
with this sort of structured intellectual activity.   Telco
employees regard this mode of "exploration" as akin to
flinging sticks of dynamite into their pond to see what
lives
on the bottom.

     *2600* has been published consistently since 1984.  It
has also run a bulletin board computer system, printed
*2600* T-shirts, taken fax calls...  The Spring 1991 issue
has
an interesting announcement on page 45:  "We just
discovered an extra set of wires attached to our fax line
and heading up the pole.  (They've since been clipped.)
Your faxes to us and to anyone else could be monitored."

      In the worldview of *2600,* the tiny band of techno-
rat brothers (rarely, sisters) are a beseiged vanguard of
the
truly free and honest.   The rest of the world is a
maelstrom
of corporate crime and high-level governmental
corruption, occasionally tempered with well-meaning
ignorance.   To read a few issues in a row is to enter a
nightmare akin to Solzhenitsyn's, somewhat tempered by
the fact that *2600* is often extremely funny.

     Goldstein did not become a target of the Hacker
Crackdown, though he protested loudly, eloquently, and
publicly about it, and it added considerably to his fame.
It
was not that he is not regarded as dangerous, because he
is so regarded.  Goldstein has had brushes with the law in
the past:  in 1985, a *2600* bulletin board computer was
seized by the FBI, and some software on it was formally
declared "a burglary tool in the form of a computer
program."  But Goldstein escaped direct repression in
1990, because his magazine is printed on paper, and
recognized as subject to Constitutional freedom of the
press protection.  As was seen in the *Ramparts* case, this
is far from an absolute guarantee.  Still, as a practical
matter, shutting down *2600* by court-order would create
so much legal hassle that it is simply unfeasible, at least
for the present.   Throughout 1990, both Goldstein and his
magazine were peevishly thriving.

     Instead, the Crackdown of 1990 would concern itself
with the computerized version of forbidden data.  The
crackdown itself, first and foremost, was about *bulletin
board systems.*  Bulletin Board Systems, most often
known by the ugly and un-pluralizable acronym "BBS," are
the life-blood of the digital underground.  Boards were
also central to law enforcement's tactics and strategy in
the Hacker Crackdown.

     A "bulletin board system" can be formally defined as
a computer which serves as an information and message-
passing center for users dialing-up over the phone-lines
through the use of  modems.   A "modem," or modulator-
demodulator, is a device which translates the digital
impulses of computers into audible analog telephone
signals, and vice versa.   Modems connect computers to
phones and thus to each other.

     Large-scale mainframe computers have been
connected since the 1960s, but *personal* computers, run
by individuals out of their homes, were first networked in
the late 1970s.   The "board" created by Ward Christensen
and Randy Suess in February 1978, in Chicago, Illinois, is
generally regarded as the first personal-computer bulletin
board system worthy of the name.

     Boards run on many different machines, employing
many different kinds of software.  Early boards were crude
and buggy, and their managers, known as "system
operators" or "sysops," were hard-working technical
experts who wrote their own software.  But like most
everything else in the world of electronics, boards became
faster, cheaper, better-designed, and generally far more
sophisticated throughout the 1980s.  They also moved
swiftly out of the hands of pioneers and into those of the
general public.   By 1985 there were something in the
neighborhood of 4,000 boards in America.  By 1990 it was
calculated, vaguely, that there were about 30,000 boards in
the US, with uncounted thousands overseas.

     Computer bulletin boards are unregulated
enterprises.  Running a board is a rough-and-ready, catch-
as-catch-can proposition.   Basically,  anybody with a
computer, modem, software and a phone-line can start a
board.   With second-hand equipment and public-domain
free software, the price of a board might be quite small --
less than it would take to publish a magazine or even a
decent pamphlet.   Entrepreneurs eagerly sell bulletin-
board software, and will coach nontechnical amateur
sysops in its use.

     Boards are not "presses."  They are not magazines, or
libraries, or phones, or CB radios, or traditional cork
bulletin boards down at the local laundry, though they
have some passing resemblance to those earlier media.
Boards are a new medium -- they may even be a *large
number* of new media.

     Consider these unique characteristics:  boards are
cheap, yet they  can have a national, even global reach.
Boards can be contacted from anywhere in the global
telephone network, at *no cost* to the person running the
board -- the caller pays the phone bill, and if the caller
is
local, the call is free.  Boards do not involve an editorial
elite addressing a mass audience.   The "sysop" of a board
is not an exclusive publisher or writer -- he is managing an
electronic salon, where individuals can address the
general public,  play the part of the general public, and
also  exchange private mail with other individuals.  And
the "conversation" on boards, though fluid, rapid, and
highly interactive, is not spoken, but written.  It is also
relatively anonymous, sometimes completely so.

     And because boards are cheap and ubiquitous,
regulations and licensing requirements would likely be
practically unenforceable.  It would almost be easier to
"regulate"  "inspect" and "license" the content of private
mail -- probably more so, since the mail system is
operated by the federal government.  Boards are run by
individuals, independently, entirely at their own whim.

     For the sysop, the cost of operation is not the primary
limiting factor.  Once the investment in a computer and
modem has been made, the only steady cost is the charge
for maintaining a phone line (or several phone lines).   The
primary limits for sysops are time and energy.  Boards
require upkeep.  New users are generally "validated" --
they must be issued individual passwords, and called at
home by voice-phone, so that their identity can be
verified.  Obnoxious users, who exist in plenty, must be
chided or purged.  Proliferating messages must be deleted
when they grow old, so that the capacity of the system is
not overwhelmed.  And software programs (if such things
are kept on the board)  must be examined for possible
computer viruses.   If there is a financial charge to use
the
board (increasingly common, especially in larger and
fancier systems) then accounts must be kept, and users
must be billed.  And if the board crashes -- a very common
occurrence -- then repairs must be made.

     Boards can be distinguished by the amount of effort
spent in regulating them.  First, we have the completely
open board, whose sysop is off chugging brews and
watching re-runs while his users generally degenerate
over time into peevish anarchy and eventual silence.
Second comes the supervised board, where the sysop
breaks in every once in a while to tidy up, calm brawls,
issue announcements, and rid the community of  dolts
and troublemakers.   Third is the heavily supervised
board,  which sternly urges adult and responsible behavior
and swiftly edits any message considered offensive,
impertinent, illegal or irrelevant.  And last comes the
completely  edited "electronic publication,"  which is
presented to a silent audience which is not allowed to
respond directly in any way.

     Boards can also be grouped by their degree of
anonymity.  There is the completely anonymous board,
where everyone uses pseudonyms -- "handles" -- and even
the sysop is unaware of the user's true identity.  The sysop
himself is likely pseudonymous on a board of this type.
Second, and rather more common, is the board where the
sysop knows (or thinks he knows) the true names and
addresses of all users, but the users don't know one
another's names and may not know his.  Third is the board
where everyone has to use real names, and roleplaying
and pseudonymous posturing are forbidden.

     Boards can be grouped by their immediacy.  "Chat-
lines" are boards linking several users together over
several different phone-lines simultaneously, so that
people exchange messages at the very moment that they
type.  (Many large boards feature "chat" capabilities along
with other services.)   Less immediate boards, perhaps
with a single phoneline, store messages serially, one at a
time.  And some boards are only open for business in
daylight hours or on weekends, which greatly slows
response.  A *network* of boards, such as "FidoNet," can
carry electronic mail from board to board, continent to
continent, across huge distances -- but at a relative
snail's
pace, so that a message can take several days to reach its
target audience and elicit a reply.

     Boards can be grouped by their degree of
community.  Some boards emphasize the exchange of
private, person-to-person electronic mail.   Others
emphasize public postings and may even purge people
who "lurk," merely reading posts but refusing to openly
participate.  Some boards are intimate and neighborly.
Others are frosty and highly technical.  Some are little
more than storage dumps for software, where users
"download" and "upload" programs, but interact among
themselves little if at all.

     Boards can be grouped by their ease of access.  Some
boards are entirely public.  Others are private and
restricted only to personal friends of the sysop.   Some
boards divide users by status.   On these boards, some
users, especially beginners, strangers or children, will be
restricted to general topics, and perhaps forbidden to post.
Favored users, though, are granted the ability to post as
they please, and to stay "on-line" as long as they like,
even
to the disadvantage of other people trying to call in.  High-
status users can be given access to hidden areas in the
board, such as off-color topics, private discussions, and/or
valuable software.  Favored users may even become
"remote sysops" with the power to take remote control of
the board through their own home computers.  Quite
often "remote sysops" end up doing all the work and
taking formal control of the enterprise, despite the fact
that it's physically located in someone else's house.
Sometimes several "co-sysops" share power.

     And boards can also be grouped by size.  Massive,
nationwide commercial networks, such as CompuServe,
Delphi, GEnie and Prodigy, are run on mainframe
computers and are generally not considered "boards,"
though they share many of their characteristics, such as
electronic mail, discussion topics, libraries of software,
and
persistent and growing problems with civil-liberties issues.
Some private boards have as many as thirty phone-lines
and quite sophisticated hardware.   And then there are
tiny boards.

     Boards vary in popularity.  Some boards are huge and
crowded, where users must claw their way in against a
constant busy-signal.  Others are huge and empty -- there
are few things sadder than a formerly flourishing board
where no one posts any longer, and the dead
conversations of vanished users lie about gathering digital
dust.  Some boards are tiny and intimate, their telephone
numbers intentionally kept confidential so that only a
small number can log on.

     And some boards are *underground.*

     Boards can be mysterious entities.  The activities of
their users can be hard to differentiate from conspiracy.
Sometimes they *are* conspiracies.  Boards have
harbored, or have been accused of harboring, all manner
of fringe groups, and have abetted, or been accused of
abetting, every manner of frowned-upon, sleazy, radical,
and criminal activity.   There are Satanist boards.  Nazi
boards.  Pornographic boards.  Pedophile boards.  Drug-
dealing boards.  Anarchist boards.  Communist boards.
Gay and Lesbian boards (these exist in great profusion,
many of them quite lively with well-established histories).
Religious cult boards.  Evangelical boards.  Witchcraft
boards, hippie boards, punk boards, skateboarder boards.
Boards for UFO believers.   There may well be boards for
serial killers, airline terrorists and professional
assassins.
There is simply no way to tell.   Boards spring up,
flourish,
and disappear in large numbers, in most every corner of
the developed world.  Even apparently innocuous public
boards can, and sometimes do, harbor secret areas known
only to a few.  And even on the vast, public, commercial
services, private mail is very private -- and quite possibly
criminal.

     Boards cover most every topic imaginable and some
that are hard to imagine.  They cover a vast spectrum of
social activity.   However, all board users do have
something in common:  their possession of computers and
phones.  Naturally, computers and phones are primary
topics of conversation on almost every board.

     And hackers and phone phreaks, those utter
devotees of computers and phones, live by boards.  They
swarm by boards.  They are bred by boards.  By the late
1980s, phone-phreak groups and hacker groups, united by
boards, had proliferated fantastically.

     As evidence, here is a list of hacker groups compiled
by the editors of *Phrack* on August 8, 1988.

     The Administration.  Advanced Telecommunications,
Inc.  ALIAS.  American Tone Travelers.  Anarchy Inc.
Apple Mafia.  The Association. Atlantic Pirates Guild.

     Bad Ass Mother Fuckers.  Bellcore.  Bell Shock Force.
Black Bag.

     Camorra.  C&M Productions.  Catholics Anonymous.
Chaos Computer Club.  Chief Executive Officers.  Circle
Of Death.  Circle Of Deneb.  Club X.  Coalition of Hi-Tech
Pirates.  Coast-To-Coast.  Corrupt Computing.  Cult Of The
Dead Cow.  Custom Retaliations.

     Damage Inc.  D&B Communications. The Dange
Gang.  Dec Hunters.  Digital Gang.  DPAK.

      Eastern Alliance. The Elite Hackers Guild.  Elite
Phreakers and Hackers Club.  The Elite Society Of
America.  EPG.  Executives Of Crime. Extasyy Elite.

      Fargo 4A.  Farmers Of Doom.  The Federation.  Feds
R Us.  First Class. Five O.  Five Star.   Force Hackers.
The
414s.

      Hack-A-Trip.  Hackers Of America.   High Mountain
Hackers.  High Society.  The Hitchhikers.

     IBM Syndicate.  The Ice Pirates.   Imperial Warlords.
Inner Circle. Inner Circle II.  Insanity Inc.  International
Computer Underground Bandits.

      Justice League of America.

      Kaos Inc.  Knights Of Shadow.  Knights Of The
Round Table.

      League Of Adepts.  Legion Of Doom.  Legion Of
Hackers.  Lords Of Chaos.  Lunatic Labs, Unlimited.

     Master Hackers.  MAD!  The Marauders.  MD/PhD.
Metal Communications, Inc.  MetalliBashers, Inc.  MBI.
Metro Communications.  Midwest Pirates Guild.

     NASA Elite.  The NATO Association.  Neon Knights.
Nihilist Order.     Order Of The Rose.  OSS.

     Pacific Pirates Guild.  Phantom Access Associates.
PHido PHreaks. The Phirm.  Phlash.  PhoneLine
Phantoms.  Phone Phreakers Of America. Phortune 500.
Phreak Hack Delinquents.  Phreak Hack Destroyers.
Phreakers, Hackers, And Laundromat Employees Gang
(PHALSE Gang).  Phreaks Against Geeks.  Phreaks
Against Phreaks Against Geeks.  Phreaks and Hackers of
America.  Phreaks Anonymous World Wide.  Project
Genesis.  The Punk Mafia.

     The Racketeers.  Red Dawn Text Files.  Roscoe Gang.

     SABRE.  Secret Circle of Pirates.  Secret Service.  707
Club.  Shadow Brotherhood.  Sharp Inc.  65C02 Elite.
Spectral Force. Star League.  Stowaways.   Strata-Crackers.

     Team Hackers '86.  Team Hackers '87.
TeleComputist Newsletter Staff.  Tribunal Of Knowledge.
Triple Entente.  Turn Over And Die Syndrome (TOADS).
300 Club.  1200 Club.  2300 Club.  2600 Club.  2601 Club.
2AF.

     The United Soft WareZ Force.  United Technical
Underground.

     Ware Brigade.  The Warelords.  WASP.

     Contemplating this list is  an impressive, almost
humbling business.   As a cultural artifact, the thing
approaches poetry.

     Underground groups -- subcultures -- can be
distinguished from independent cultures by their  habit of
referring constantly to the parent society.  Undergrounds
by their nature constantly  must maintain a membrane of
differentiation.   Funny/distinctive clothes and hair,
specialized jargon, specialized ghettoized areas in cities,
different hours of rising, working, sleeping....  The
digital
underground, which specializes in information, relies very
heavily on language to distinguish itself.   As can be seen
from this list, they make heavy use of parody and
mockery.   It's revealing to see who they choose to mock.

     First,  large corporations.  We have the Phortune 500,
The Chief Executive Officers,  Bellcore,  IBM Syndicate,
SABRE (a computerized reservation service maintained
by airlines).  The common use of "Inc." is telling -- none
of
these groups are actual corporations, but take clear
delight in mimicking them.

     Second,  governments and police.  NASA Elite, NATO
Association.  "Feds R Us" and "Secret Service" are fine bits
of fleering boldness.  OSS -- the Office of Strategic
Services
was the forerunner of the CIA.

     Third, criminals.  Using stigmatizing pejoratives as a
perverse badge of honor is a time-honored tactic for
subcultures:   punks, gangs, delinquents, mafias, pirates,
bandits, racketeers.

     Specialized orthography, especially the use of "ph"
for "f" and "z" for the plural "s," are instant recognition
symbols.  So is the use of the numeral "0" for the letter
"O"
-- computer-software orthography generally features a
slash through the zero, making the distinction obvious.

     Some terms are poetically descriptive of computer
intrusion:  the Stowaways,  the Hitchhikers, the PhoneLine
Phantoms, Coast-to-Coast.  Others are simple bravado
and vainglorious puffery.  (Note the insistent use of the
terms "elite" and "master.")  Some terms are
blasphemous, some obscene, others merely cryptic --
anything to puzzle, offend, confuse, and keep the straights
at bay.

     Many hacker groups further re-encrypt their names
by the use of acronyms:  United Technical Underground
becomes UTU, Farmers of Doom become FoD,  the
United SoftWareZ Force becomes, at its own insistence,
"TuSwF," and woe to the ignorant rodent who capitalizes
the wrong letters.

     It should be further recognized that the members of
these groups are themselves pseudonymous.  If you did, in
fact, run across the "PhoneLine Phantoms," you would find
them to consist of  "Carrier Culprit,"  "The Executioner,"
"Black Majik,"  "Egyptian Lover,"  "Solid State," and  "Mr
Icom."  "Carrier Culprit" will likely be referred to by his
friends as "CC," as in, "I got these dialups from CC of
PLP."

     It's quite possible that this entire list refers to as
few
as a thousand people.   It is not a complete list of
underground groups -- there has never been such a list,
and there never will be.   Groups rise, flourish, decline,
share membership, maintain a cloud of wannabes and
casual hangers-on.  People pass in and out, are ostracized,
get bored, are busted by police, or are cornered by telco
security and presented with huge bills.  Many
"underground groups" are software pirates, "warez d00dz,"
who might break copy protection and pirate programs, but
likely wouldn't dare to intrude on a computer-system.

     It is hard to estimate the true population of the
digital
underground.  There is constant turnover.  Most hackers
start young, come and go, then drop out at age 22 -- the
age of college graduation.  And a large majority of
"hackers" access pirate boards, adopt a handle,  swipe
software and perhaps abuse a phone-code or two, while
never actually joining the elite.

     Some professional informants, who make it their
business to retail knowledge of the underground to
paymasters in private corporate security, have estimated
the hacker population at as high as fifty thousand.   This
is
likely highly inflated, unless one counts every single
teenage software pirate  and petty phone-booth thief.  My
best guess is about 5,000 people.   Of these, I would guess
that as few as a hundred are truly "elite"  -- active
computer intruders, skilled enough to penetrate
sophisticated systems and truly to worry corporate security
and law enforcement.

     Another interesting speculation is whether this group
is growing or not.  Young teenage hackers are often
convinced that hackers exist in vast swarms and will soon
dominate the cybernetic universe.  Older and wiser
veterans, perhaps as wizened as 24 or 25 years old, are
convinced that the glory days are long gone, that the cops
have the underground's number now, and that kids these
days are dirt-stupid and just want to play Nintendo.

     My own assessment is that computer intrusion, as a
non-profit act of intellectual exploration and mastery, is
in
slow decline, at least in the United States; but that
electronic fraud, especially telecommunication crime, is
growing by leaps and bounds.

     One might find a useful parallel to the digital
underground in  the drug  underground.   There was a
time, now much-obscured by historical revisionism, when
Bohemians freely shared joints at concerts, and hip, small-
scale marijuana dealers might turn people on just for the
sake of enjoying a long stoned conversation about the
Doors and Allen Ginsberg.  Now drugs are increasingly
verboten, except in a high-stakes, highly-criminal world of
highly addictive drugs.  Over years of disenchantment and
police harassment, a vaguely ideological, free-wheeling
drug underground has relinquished the business of drug-
dealing to a  far more savage criminal hard-core.   This is
not a pleasant prospect to contemplate, but the analogy is
fairly compelling.

     What does an underground board look like?   What
distinguishes it from a standard board?  It isn't
necessarily
the conversation -- hackers often talk about common
board topics, such as hardware, software, sex, science
fiction, current events, politics, movies, personal gossip.
Underground boards can best be distinguished by their
files, or "philes,"  pre-composed texts which teach the
techniques and ethos of the underground.   These are
prized reservoirs of forbidden knowledge.  Some are
anonymous, but most proudly bear the handle of the
"hacker" who has created them, and his group affiliation, if
he has one.

     Here is a partial table-of-contents of philes from an
underground board, somewhere in the heart of middle
America, circa 1991.  The descriptions are mostly self-
explanatory.


BANKAMER.ZIP    5406 06-11-91  Hacking Bank America
CHHACK.ZIP      4481 06-11-91  Chilton Hacking
CITIBANK.ZIP    4118 06-11-91  Hacking Citibank
CREDIMTC.ZIP    3241 06-11-91  Hacking Mtc Credit
Company
DIGEST.ZIP      5159 06-11-91  Hackers Digest
HACK.ZIP       14031 06-11-91  How To Hack
HACKBAS.ZIP     5073 06-11-91  Basics Of Hacking
HACKDICT.ZIP   42774 06-11-91  Hackers Dictionary
HACKER.ZIP     57938 06-11-91  Hacker Info
HACKERME.ZIP    3148 06-11-91  Hackers Manual
HACKHAND.ZIP    4814 06-11-91  Hackers Handbook
HACKTHES.ZIP   48290 06-11-91  Hackers Thesis
HACKVMS.ZIP     4696 06-11-91  Hacking Vms Systems
MCDON.ZIP       3830 06-11-91  Hacking Macdonalds
(Home Of The Archs)
P500UNIX.ZIP   15525 06-11-91  Phortune 500 Guide To
Unix
RADHACK.ZIP     8411 06-11-91  Radio Hacking
TAOTRASH.DOC    4096 12-25-89  Suggestions For
Trashing
TECHHACK.ZIP    5063 06-11-91  Technical Hacking


The files above are do-it-yourself manuals about
computer intrusion.  The above is only a small section of a
much larger library of hacking and phreaking techniques
and history.  We now move into a different and perhaps
surprising area.

                              +------------+
                              |Anarchy|
                              +------------+

ANARC.ZIP       3641 06-11-91  Anarchy Files
ANARCHST.ZIP   63703 06-11-91  Anarchist Book
ANARCHY.ZIP     2076 06-11-91  Anarchy At Home
ANARCHY3.ZIP    6982 06-11-91  Anarchy No 3
ANARCTOY.ZIP    2361 06-11-91  Anarchy Toys
ANTIMODM.ZIP    2877 06-11-91  Anti-modem Weapons
ATOM.ZIP        4494 06-11-91  How To Make An Atom
Bomb
BARBITUA.ZIP    3982 06-11-91  Barbiturate Formula
BLCKPWDR.ZIP    2810 06-11-91  Black Powder Formulas
BOMB.ZIP        3765 06-11-91  How To Make Bombs
BOOM.ZIP        2036 06-11-91  Things That Go Boom
CHLORINE.ZIP    1926 06-11-91  Chlorine Bomb
COOKBOOK.ZIP    1500 06-11-91  Anarchy Cook Book
DESTROY.ZIP     3947 06-11-91  Destroy Stuff
DUSTBOMB.ZIP    2576 06-11-91  Dust Bomb
ELECTERR.ZIP    3230 06-11-91  Electronic Terror
EXPLOS1.ZIP     2598 06-11-91  Explosives 1
EXPLOSIV.ZIP   18051 06-11-91  More Explosives
EZSTEAL.ZIP     4521 06-11-91  Ez-stealing
FLAME.ZIP       2240 06-11-91  Flame Thrower
FLASHLT.ZIP     2533 06-11-91  Flashlight Bomb
FMBUG.ZIP       2906 06-11-91  How To Make An Fm Bug
OMEEXPL.ZIP    2139 06-11-91  Home Explosives
HOW2BRK.ZIP     3332 06-11-91  How To Break In
LETTER.ZIP      2990 06-11-91  Letter Bomb
LOCK.ZIP        2199 06-11-91  How To Pick Locks
MRSHIN.ZIP      3991 06-11-91  Briefcase Locks
NAPALM.ZIP      3563 06-11-91  Napalm At Home
NITRO.ZIP       3158 06-11-91  Fun With Nitro
PARAMIL.ZIP     2962 06-11-91  Paramilitary Info
PICKING.ZIP     3398 06-11-91  Picking Locks
PIPEBOMB.ZIP    2137 06-11-91  Pipe Bomb
POTASS.ZIP      3987 06-11-91  Formulas With Potassium
PRANK.TXT      11074 08-03-90  More Pranks To Pull On
Idiots!
REVENGE.ZIP     4447 06-11-91  Revenge Tactics
ROCKET.ZIP      2590 06-11-91  Rockets For Fun
SMUGGLE.ZIP     3385 06-11-91  How To Smuggle

     *Holy Cow!*  The damned thing is full of stuff about
bombs!

     What are we to make of this?

     First, it should be acknowledged that spreading
knowledge about demolitions to teenagers is a highly and
deliberately antisocial act.   It is not, however, illegal.

     Second, it should be recognized that most of these
philes were in fact *written* by teenagers.  Most adult
American males who can remember their teenage years
will recognize that the notion of building a flamethrower in
your garage is an incredibly neat-o idea.  *Actually*
building a flamethrower in your garage, however, is
fraught with discouraging difficulty.  Stuffing gunpowder
into a booby-trapped flashlight, so as to blow the arm off
your high-school vice-principal, can be a thing of dark
beauty to contemplate.   Actually committing assault by
explosives  will earn you the sustained attention of the
federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.

     Some people, however, will actually try these plans.  A
determinedly murderous American teenager can
probably buy or steal a handgun far more easily than he
can brew fake "napalm" in the kitchen sink.  Nevertheless,
if temptation is spread before people a certain number
will succumb, and a small minority will actually attempt
these stunts.  A large minority of that small minority will
either fail or, quite likely, maim themselves, since these
"philes" have not been checked for accuracy, are not the
product of professional experience, and are often highly
fanciful.  But the gloating menace of these philes is not to
be entirely dismissed.

     Hackers may not be "serious" about bombing; if they
were, we would hear far more about exploding flashlights,
homemade bazookas, and gym teachers poisoned by
chlorine and potassium.  However, hackers are *very*
serious about forbidden knowledge.  They are possessed
not merely by curiosity, but by a positive *lust to know.*
The desire to know what others don't is scarcely new.  But
the *intensity* of this desire, as manifested by these young
technophilic denizens of the Information Age, may in fact
*be* new, and may represent some basic shift in social
values -- a harbinger of what the world may come to, as
society lays more and more value on the possession,
assimilation and retailing of *information* as a basic
commodity of daily life.

     There have always been young men with obsessive
interests in these topics.  Never before, however, have they
been able to network so extensively and easily, and to
propagandize their interests with impunity to random
passers-by.   High-school teachers will recognize that
there's always one in a crowd, but when the one in a crowd
escapes control by jumping into the phone-lines, and
becomes a hundred such kids all together on a board,
then trouble is brewing visibly.  The urge of authority to
*do something,*  even something drastic, is hard to resist.
And in 1990, authority did something.  In fact authority did
a great deal.

                    #

     The process by which boards create hackers goes
something like this.  A youngster becomes interested in
computers -- usually, computer games.  He hears from
friends that "bulletin boards" exist where games can be
obtained for free.  (Many computer games are "freeware,"
not copyrighted -- invented simply for the love of it and
given away to the public; some of these games are quite
good.)  He bugs his parents for a modem, or quite often,
uses his parents' modem.

      The world of boards suddenly opens up.  Computer
games can be quite expensive, real budget-breakers for a
kid, but pirated games, stripped of copy protection,  are
cheap or free.  They are also illegal, but it is very rare,
almost unheard of, for a small-scale software pirate to be
prosecuted.  Once "cracked" of its copy protection, the
program, being digital data, becomes infinitely
reproducible.  Even the instructions to the game, any
manuals that accompany it, can be reproduced as text
files, or photocopied from legitimate sets.  Other users  on
boards can give many useful hints in game-playing tactics.
And a youngster with an infinite supply of free computer
games can certainly cut quite a swath among his modem-
less friends.

     And boards are pseudonymous.  No one need know
that you're fourteen years old -- with a little practice at
subterfuge, you can talk to adults about adult things, and
be accepted and taken seriously!  You can even pretend to
be a girl, or an old man, or anybody you can imagine.  If
you find this kind of deception gratifying, there is ample
opportunity to hone your ability on boards.

     But local boards can grow stale.  And almost every
board maintains a list of phone-numbers to other boards,
some in distant, tempting, exotic locales.   Who knows
what they're up to, in Oregon or Alaska or Florida or
California?  It's very easy to find out -- just  order the
modem to call through its software -- nothing to this, just
typing on a keyboard, the same thing you would do for
most any computer game.   The machine reacts swiftly
and in a few seconds you are talking to a bunch of
interesting people on another seaboard.

     And yet the *bills* for this trivial action can be
staggering!  Just by going tippety-tap with your fingers,
you
may have saddled your parents with four hundred bucks
in long-distance charges, and gotten chewed out but good.
That hardly seems fair.

     How horrifying to have made friends in another state
and to be deprived of their company -- and their software -
-  just because telephone companies demand absurd
amounts of money!   How painful, to be restricted to
boards in one's own *area code* --   what the heck is an
"area code" anyway, and what makes it so special?   A few
grumbles, complaints, and innocent questions of this sort
will often elicit a sympathetic reply from another board
user  --  someone with some stolen codes to hand.  You
dither a while,  knowing this isn't quite right, then you
make up your mind to try them anyhow -- *and they work!*
Suddenly you're doing something even your parents can't
do.  Six months ago you were just some kid -- now, you're
the Crimson Flash of Area Code 512!   You're bad -- you're
nationwide!

     Maybe you'll stop at a few abused codes.  Maybe
you'll decide that boards aren't all that interesting after
all,
that it's wrong, not worth the risk  -- but maybe you won't.
The next step is to pick up your own repeat-dialling
program --  to learn to generate your own stolen codes.
(This was dead easy five years ago, much harder to get
away with nowadays, but not yet impossible.)   And these
dialling programs are not complex or intimidating -- some
are as small as twenty lines of software.

     Now, you too can share codes.   You can trade codes
to learn other techniques.   If you're smart enough to catch
on, and obsessive enough to want to bother,  and ruthless
enough to start seriously bending rules, then you'll get
better, fast.  You start to develop a rep.  You  move up to
a
heavier class of board -- a board with a bad attitude, the
kind of board that naive dopes like your classmates and
your former self have never even heard of!  You pick up
the jargon of phreaking and hacking from the board.   You
read a few of those anarchy philes -- and man, you never
realized you could be a real *outlaw* without ever leaving
your bedroom.

     You still play other computer games, but now you
have a new and bigger game.   This one will bring you a
different kind of status than destroying even eight zillion
lousy space invaders.

     Hacking is perceived by hackers as a "game."  This is
not an entirely unreasonable or sociopathic perception.
You can win or lose at hacking, succeed or fail, but it
never
feels "real."  It's not simply that imaginative youngsters
sometimes have a hard time telling "make-believe" from
"real life."  Cyberspace is *not real!*  "Real" things are
physical objects like trees and  shoes and cars.  Hacking
takes place on a screen.   Words aren't physical, numbers
(even telephone numbers and credit card numbers)
aren't physical.  Sticks and stones may break my bones,
but data will never hurt me.  Computers *simulate* reality,
like computer games that simulate tank battles or
dogfights or spaceships.   Simulations are just make-
believe, and the stuff in computers is *not real.*

     Consider this:  if "hacking" is supposed to be so
serious and real-life and  dangerous, then how come
*nine-year-old kids* have computers and modems?  You
wouldn't give a nine year old his own car, or his own rifle,
or
his own chainsaw -- those things are "real."

     People underground are perfectly aware that the
"game" is frowned upon by the powers that be.   Word gets
around about busts in the underground.   Publicizing busts
is one of the primary functions of pirate boards,  but they
also promulgate an attitude about them, and their own
idiosyncratic ideas of justice.   The users of underground
boards won't complain if some guy is busted for crashing
systems, spreading viruses, or stealing money by wire-
fraud.   They may shake their heads with a sneaky grin, but
they won't openly defend these practices.   But when a kid
is charged with some theoretical amount of theft:
$233,846.14, for instance, because he sneaked into a
computer and copied something, and kept it in his house
on a floppy disk -- this is regarded as a sign of near-
insanity from prosecutors, a sign that they've drastically
mistaken the immaterial game of computing for their real
and boring everyday world of fatcat corporate money.

     It's as if big companies and their suck-up lawyers
think that computing belongs to them, and they can retail
it with price stickers, as if it were boxes of laundry soap!
But pricing "information"  is like trying to price air or
price
dreams.  Well, anybody on a pirate board knows that
computing can be, and ought to be, *free.*  Pirate boards
are little independent worlds in cyberspace, and they don't
belong to anybody but the underground.   Underground
boards aren't "brought to you by Procter & Gamble."

     To log on to an underground board can mean to
experience liberation, to enter a world where, for once,
money isn't everything and adults don't have all the
answers.

     Let's sample another vivid hacker manifesto.  Here
are some excerpts from "The Conscience of a Hacker," by
"The Mentor," from *Phrack* Volume One, Issue 7, Phile
3.

     "I made a discovery today.  I found a computer.  Wait
a second, this is cool.  It does what I want it to.  If it
makes a
mistake, it's because I screwed it up.  Not because it
doesn't like me.(...)
     "And then it happened... a door opened to a world...
rushing through the phone line like heroin through an
addict's veins, an electronic pulse is sent out, a refuge
from day-to-day incompetencies is sought... a board is
found.   'This is it...  this is where I belong...'
     "I know everyone here... even if I've never met them,
never talked to them, may never hear from them again... I
know you all...(...)
     "This is our world now....  the world of the electron
and
the switch, the beauty of the baud.  We make use of a
service already existing without paying for what could be
dirt-cheap if it wasn't run by profiteering gluttons, and
you
call us criminals.  We explore... and you call us criminals.
We seek after knowledge... and you call us criminals.  We
exist without skin color, without nationality, without
religious bias... and you call us criminals.  You build
atomic
bombs, you wage wars, you murder, cheat and lie to us and
try to make us believe that it's for our own good, yet we're
the criminals.
     "Yes, I am a criminal.  My crime is that of curiosity.
My crime is that of judging people by what they say and
think, not what they look like.  My crime is that of
outsmarting you, something that you will never forgive me
for."

                         #

     There have been underground boards almost as long
as there have been boards.  One of the first was 8BBS,
which became a stronghold of the West Coast phone-
phreak elite.   After going on-line in March 1980, 8BBS
sponsored "Susan Thunder," and "Tuc,"  and, most
notoriously, "the Condor."  "The Condor"  bore the singular
distinction of becoming the most vilified American phreak
and hacker ever.   Angry underground associates, fed up
with Condor's peevish behavior, turned him in to police,
along with a heaping double-helping of  outrageous
hacker legendry.  As a result, Condor was kept in solitary
confinement for seven months,  for fear that he might start
World War Three by triggering missile silos from the
prison payphone.  (Having served his time, Condor is now
walking around loose;  WWIII has thus far conspicuously
failed to occur.)

     The sysop of 8BBS was an ardent free-speech
enthusiast who simply felt that *any* attempt to restrict
the expression of his users was unconstitutional and
immoral.   Swarms of the technically curious entered 8BBS
and emerged as phreaks and hackers, until, in 1982, a
friendly 8BBS alumnus passed the sysop a new modem
which had been purchased by credit-card fraud.  Police
took this opportunity to seize the entire board and remove
what they considered an attractive nuisance.

     Plovernet was a powerful East Coast pirate board that
operated in both New York and Florida.  Owned and
operated by teenage hacker "Quasi Moto,"  Plovernet
attracted five hundred eager users in 1983.  "Emmanuel
Goldstein" was one-time co-sysop of Plovernet, along with
"Lex Luthor,"  founder of the "Legion of Doom" group.
Plovernet  bore the signal honor of being the original
home of the "Legion of Doom," about which the reader will
be hearing a great deal, soon.

     "Pirate-80," or "P-80," run by a sysop known as "Scan-
Man," got into the game very early in Charleston, and
continued steadily for years.  P-80 flourished so flagrantly
that even its most hardened users became nervous, and
some slanderously speculated that "Scan Man" must have
ties to corporate security, a charge he vigorously denied.

     "414 Private" was the home board for the first *group*
to attract conspicuous trouble, the teenage "414 Gang,"
whose intrusions into Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and
Los Alamos military computers were to be a nine-days-
wonder in 1982.

     At about this time, the first software piracy boards
began to open up, trading cracked games for the Atari 800
and the Commodore C64.   Naturally these boards were
heavily frequented by teenagers.  And with the 1983
release of the hacker-thriller movie *War Games,* the
scene exploded.   It seemed that every kid in America had
demanded and  gotten a modem for Christmas.  Most of
these dabbler wannabes put their modems in the attic
after a few weeks, and most of the remainder minded their
P's and Q's and stayed well out of hot water.  But some
stubborn and talented diehards had this hacker kid in
*War Games* figured for a happening dude.   They simply
could not rest until they had contacted the underground --
or, failing that, created their own.

     In the mid-80s, underground boards sprang up like
digital fungi.  ShadowSpawn Elite.  Sherwood Forest I, II,
and III. Digital Logic Data Service in Florida, sysoped by
no less a man than "Digital Logic" himself; Lex Luthor of
the Legion of Doom was prominent on this board, since it
was in his area code.  Lex's own board,  "Legion of Doom,"
started in 1984.  The Neon Knights ran a network of Apple-
hacker boards: Neon Knights North, South, East and
West.   Free World II was run by "Major Havoc."  Lunatic
Labs is still in operation as of this writing.   Dr. Ripco
in
Chicago, an anything-goes anarchist board with an
extensive and raucous history, was seized by Secret
Service agents in 1990 on Sundevil day, but up again
almost immediately, with new machines and scarcely
diminished  vigor.

     The St. Louis scene was not to rank with major centers
of American hacking such as New York and L.A.  But St.
Louis did rejoice in possession of "Knight Lightning" and
"Taran King,"  two of the foremost *journalists* native to
the underground.   Missouri boards like Metal Shop,
Metal Shop Private, Metal Shop Brewery, may not have
been the heaviest boards around in terms of illicit
expertise.  But they became boards where hackers could
exchange social gossip and try to figure out what the heck
was going on nationally -- and internationally.   Gossip
from Metal Shop was put into the form of news files, then
assembled into a general electronic publication, *Phrack,*
a portmanteau title coined from "phreak" and "hack."  The
*Phrack* editors were as obsessively curious about other
hackers as hackers were about machines.

     *Phrack,* being free of charge and lively reading,
began to circulate throughout the underground.   As Taran
King and Knight Lightning left high school for college,
*Phrack* began to appear on mainframe machines linked
to BITNET, and, through BITNET to the "Internet,"  that
loose but extremely potent not-for-profit network where
academic, governmental and corporate machines trade
data through the UNIX TCP/IP protocol.   (The "Internet
Worm"  of  November 2-3,1988, created by Cornell grad
student Robert Morris,  was to be the largest and best-
publicized computer-intrusion scandal to date.  Morris
claimed that his ingenious "worm" program was meant to
harmlessly explore the Internet, but due to bad
programming, the Worm replicated out of control and
crashed some six thousand Internet computers.   Smaller-
scale and less ambitious Internet hacking was a standard
for the underground elite.)

     Most any underground board not hopelessly lame
and out-of-it would feature a complete run of *Phrack* --
and, possibly, the lesser-known standards of the
underground:  the *Legion of Doom Technical Journal,*
the obscene and raucous *Cult of the Dead Cow*  files,
*P/HUN*  magazine,  *Pirate,*  the *Syndicate Reports,*
and perhaps the highly anarcho-political *Activist Times
Incorporated.*

     Possession of *Phrack*  on one's board was prima
facie evidence of a bad attitude.   *Phrack* was seemingly
everywhere, aiding, abetting, and spreading the
underground ethos.  And this did not escape the attention
of corporate security or the police.

      We now come to the touchy subject of police and
boards.  Police, do, in fact, own boards.   In 1989, there
were
police-sponsored boards in California, Colorado, Florida,
Georgia, Idaho, Michigan, Missouri, Texas, and Virginia:
boards such as "Crime Bytes,"  "Crimestoppers,"  "All
Points" and "Bullet-N-Board."   Police officers, as private
computer enthusiasts, ran their own boards in Arizona,
California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Missouri,
Maryland, New Mexico, North Carolina, Ohio, Tennessee
and Texas.   Police boards have often proved helpful in
community relations.  Sometimes crimes are reported on
police boards.

     Sometimes crimes are *committed*  on police
boards.  This has sometimes happened by accident, as
naive hackers blunder onto police boards and blithely
begin offering telephone codes.  Far more often, however,
it occurs through the now almost-traditional use of "sting
boards."  The first police sting-boards were established in
1985:  "Underground Tunnel" in Austin, Texas, whose
sysop Sgt. Robert Ansley called himself "Pluto" -- "The
Phone Company" in Phoenix, Arizona, run by Ken
MacLeod of the Maricopa County Sheriff's office -- and
Sgt. Dan Pasquale's board in Fremont, California.   Sysops
posed as hackers, and swiftly garnered coteries of ardent
users, who posted codes and loaded pirate software with
abandon, and came to a sticky end.

     Sting boards, like other boards, are cheap to operate,
very cheap by the standards of undercover police
operations.  Once accepted by the local underground,
sysops will likely be invited into other pirate boards,
where
they can compile more dossiers.  And when the sting is
announced and the worst offenders arrested, the publicity
is generally  gratifying.  The resultant paranoia in the
underground -- perhaps more justly described as a
"deterrence effect" -- tends to quell local lawbreaking for
quite a while.

     Obviously police do not have to beat the underbrush
for hackers.  On the contrary, they can go trolling for
them.
Those caught can be grilled.  Some become useful
informants.  They can lead the way to pirate boards all
across the country.

     And boards all across the country showed the sticky
fingerprints of *Phrack,* and of that loudest and most
flagrant of all underground groups, the "Legion of Doom."

     The term "Legion of Doom" came from comic books.
The Legion of Doom, a conspiracy of costumed super-
villains headed by the chrome-domed criminal ultra-
mastermind Lex Luthor, gave Superman a lot of four-color
graphic trouble for a number of decades.   Of course,
Superman, that exemplar of Truth, Justice, and the
American Way, always won in the long run.   This didn't
matter to the hacker Doomsters -- "Legion of Doom" was
not some thunderous and evil Satanic reference, it was not
meant to be taken seriously.  "Legion of Doom" came
from funny-books and was supposed to be funny.

     "Legion of Doom" did have a good mouthfilling ring
to it, though.  It sounded really cool.  Other groups, such
as
the "Farmers of Doom," closely allied to LoD, recognized
this grandiloquent quality, and made fun of it.  There was
even a hacker group called "Justice League of America,"
named after Superman's club of true-blue crimefighting
superheros.

     But they didn't last; the Legion did.

     The original Legion of Doom, hanging out on Quasi
Moto's Plovernet board, were phone phreaks.   They
weren't much into computers.   "Lex Luthor" himself (who
was under eighteen when he formed the Legion)  was a
COSMOS expert, COSMOS being the "Central System for
Mainframe Operations," a telco internal computer
network.   Lex would eventually become quite a dab hand
at breaking into IBM mainframes, but although everyone
liked Lex and admired his attitude, he was not considered
a truly accomplished computer intruder.  Nor was he the
"mastermind" of the Legion of Doom --  LoD were never
big on formal leadership.  As a regular on Plovernet and
sysop of his "Legion of Doom BBS,"  Lex was the Legion's
cheerleader and recruiting officer.

     Legion of Doom began on the ruins of an earlier
phreak group, The Knights of Shadow.  Later, LoD was to
subsume the personnel of the hacker group "Tribunal of
Knowledge."  People came and went constantly in LoD;
groups split up or formed offshoots.

     Early on, the LoD phreaks befriended a few
computer-intrusion enthusiasts, who became the
associated "Legion of Hackers."  Then the two groups
conflated into the "Legion of Doom/Hackers,"  or LoD/H.
When the original "hacker" wing, Messrs. "Compu-
Phreak" and "Phucked Agent 04," found other matters to
occupy their time, the extra "/H" slowly atrophied out of
the name;  but by this time the phreak wing, Messrs.  Lex
Luthor, "Blue Archer," "Gary Seven," "Kerrang Khan,"
"Master of Impact," "Silver Spy," "The Marauder," and
"The Videosmith," had picked up a plethora of intrusion
expertise and had become a force to be reckoned with.

     LoD members seemed to have an instinctive
understanding that the way to real power in the
underground lay through covert publicity.   LoD were
flagrant.  Not only was it one of the earliest groups, but
the
members took pains to widely distribute their illicit
knowledge.   Some LoD members, like "The Mentor," were
close to evangelical about it.   *Legion of Doom Technical
Journal*  began to show up on boards throughout the
underground.

     *LoD Technical Journal* was named in cruel parody
of the ancient and honored *AT&T Technical Journal.*
The material in these two publications was quite similar --
much of it, adopted from public journals and discussions
in the telco community.  And yet, the predatory attitude of
LoD made even its most innocuous data seem deeply
sinister; an outrage; a clear and present danger.

     To see why this should be, let's consider the following
(invented) paragraphs, as a kind of thought experi